# 00后大学生：培养无穷小精灵是否侵权？ - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2018年06月13日 11:19:59[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：95
        中国00后大学生学习“ElementaryCalculus”是否侵权？请见该书作者第三版的版权声明。
        鲁宾逊现代无穷小理论是全人类思维的宝贵财富，无穷小精灵值得骄傲。
袁萌  6月13日
附：
**        Elementary Calculus: An Infinitesimal Approach**
        On-line Edition. Copyright ? 2000 by H.Jerome Keisler, revised August 2017.This is acalculus textbook at the college Freshman level based on Abraham Robinson'sinfinitesimals, which date from 1960. Robinson's modern infinitesimal approachputs the intuitive ideas of the founders of the calculus on a mathematicallysound footing, and is easier for beginners to understand than the more commonapproach via epsilon, delta definitions.
        The First Editionof this book was published in 1976, and a revised Second Edition was publishedin 1986, both by Prindle, Weber & Schmidt. When the Second Edition becameout of print, the copyright was returned to me as the author. In September 2002I decided to make the book available for free in electronic form at this site.These PDF files were made from the printed Second Edition, and are continuallybeing revised with minor corrections.
        A Third Editionof this book was published by Dover Publications, Inc. in 2012, with theagreement that this online version will continue to be freely available. Thisgives you the choice of downloading this free version or purchasing the printedbook.
        This work islicensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0Unported License. A picture of the cover The whole book in one large file (25 megabytes)
Single chapters in much smaller files:
Preface to First and Second Editions
Contents and Introduction
Chapter 1 Real and Hyperreal Numbers
Chapter 2 Differentiation
Chapter 3 Continuous Functions
Chapter 4 Integration
Chapter 5 Limits, Analytic Geometry, and Approximations
Chapter 6 Applications of the Integral
Chapter 7 Trigonometric Functions
Chapter 8 Exponential and Logarithmic Functions
Chapter 9 Infinite Series
Chapter 10 Vectors
Chapter 11 Partial Differentiation
Chapter 12 Multiple Integrals
Chapter 13 Vector Calculus
Chapter 14 Differential Equations
Appendix and Index Epilogue      
