# 80老翁谈人生（277）：美国发展人工智能的7条国家级政策 - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2016年12月04日 11:07:48[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：446
80老翁谈人生（277）：美国发展人工智能的7条国家级政策
2016年10月16日，美国白宫发表48页白皮书（THE
 NATIONAL ARTIFICIALINTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIC PLAN），其中有一个“Executive Summary”，写得很好。现将原文整理如下，与读者分享：
“Artificial
 intelligence(AI) is a transformative technology that holds promise for tremendous societaland economic benefit. AI has the potential to revolutionize how we live, work,learn, discover, and communicate. AI research can further our nationalpriorities, including
 increased economic prosperity, improved educationalopportunities and quality of life, and enhanced national and homeland security.Because of these potential benefits, the U.S. government has invested in AIresearch for many years. Yet, as with any significant
 technology in which theFederal government has interest, there are not only tremendous opportunitiesbut also a number of considerations that must be taken into account in guidingthe overall direction of Federally-funded R&D in AI.
On May 3, 2016,theAdministration announced the formation of a new NSTC Subcommittee on MachineLearning and Artificial intelligence, to help coordinate Federal activity
 inAI.1 This Subcommittee, on June 15, 2016, directed the Subcommittee onNetworking and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) tocreate a National Artificial Intelligence Research and Development StrategicPlan. A NITRD Task Force on Artificial
 Intelligence was then formed to definethe Federal strategic priorities for AI R&D, with particular attention onareas that industry is unlikely to address.
This National ArtificialIntelligence R&D Strategic Plan establishes a set of objectives forFederally-funded AI research, both research occurring within the government
 aswell as Federally-funded research occurring outside of government, such as inacademia. The ultimate goal of this research is to produce new AI knowledge andtechnologies that provide a range of positive benefits to society, while minimizingthe negative impacts.
 To achieve this goal, this AI R&D Strategic Planidentifies the following priorities for Federally-funded AI research:
（7条国家级发展政策）
Strategy 1: Makelong-term investments in AI research. Prioritize investments in the nextgeneration of AI that will drive discovery and insight and enable the UnitedStates
 to remain a world leader in AI. 
Strategy 2: Developeffective methods for human-AI collaboration. Rather than replace humans, mostAI systems will collaborate with humans to achieve optimal performance.Research
 is needed to create effective interactions between humans and AIsystems. 
Strategy 3: Understandand address the ethical, legal, and societal implications of AI. We expect AItechnologies to behave according to the formal and informal norms to
 which wehold our fellow humans. Research is needed to understand the ethical, legal,and social implications of AI, and to develop methods for designing AI systemsthat align with ethical, legal, and societal goals.
Strategy 4: Ensure thesafety and security of AI systems. Before AI systems are in widespread use,assurance is needed that the systems will operate safely and securely,
 in acontrolled, well-defined, and well-understood manner. Further progress inresearch is needed to address this challenge of creating AI systems that arereliable, dependable, and trustworthy.
Strategy 5: Developshared public datasets and environments for AI training and testing. The depth,quality, and accuracy of training datasets and resources significantly
 affectAI performance. Researchers need to develop high quality datasets andenvironments and enable responsible access to high-quality datasets as well asto testing and training resources.
Strategy 6: Measure andevaluate AI technologies through standards and benchmarks. . Essential toadvancements in AI are standards, benchmarks, testbeds, and communityengagement
 that guide and evaluate progress in AI. Additional research isneeded to develop a broad spectrum of evaluative techniques.
Strategy 7: Betterunderstand the national AI R&D workforce needs. Advances in AI will requirea strong community of AI researchers. An improved understanding of current
 andfuture R&D workforce demands in AI is needed to help ensure that sufficientAI experts are available to address the strategic R&D areas outlined inthis plan.
The AI R&D Strategic Plan closes with two recommendations:（表明两条国家级建议）：
Recommendation 1: Developan AI R&D implementation framework to identify S&T opportunities andsupport effective coordination of AI R&D investments, consistent withStrategies
 1-6 of this plan. 
Recommendation 2: Studythe national landscape for creating and sustaining a healthy AI R&Dworkforce, consistent with Strategy 7 of this plan.
请读者仔细琢磨以上两条建议。
袁萌12月4日
