# Introduction  to the Keisler order - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2018年08月21日 18:12:39[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：133
INTRODUCTION TO THE KEISLER ORDER
By KYLE GANNON
Abstract. In this paper, we introduce the basic deﬁnitions and concepts necessary to deﬁne the Keisler Order. We will prove the order is well-deﬁned as well as the existence of a maximal class with respect to the order.
Contents
1. Introduction 1 
2. Notation and Basic Deﬁnitions 2 
3. Ultrapowers 3 
4. Saturation and Satisfaction 6 
5. An Early Application 7 
6. The Order 9 
7. Existence of a Maximal Class 10 Acknowledgments 12 
References 12
1. Introduction
The Keisler Order was ﬁrst introduced by H. Jerome Keisler in 1967. Currently, this order is known to be a pre-order on (countable) ﬁrst-order theories which, broadly speaking, ranks classes of theories by complexity. Stronger theorems have been proven for stable theories (e.g. the Keisler Order on stable theories is linear [5]), while the complete structure of the Keisler Order is still an open problem. The classiﬁcation of ﬁrst-order theories is both a classic and modern program in model theory. Shelah’s stability program, the most famous type of classiﬁcation framework, organizes theories relative to the number of deﬁnable types over subsets of a model. While the stability program has had great success, the program also leaves unstable theories in some unclassiﬁable purgatory. Work on the Keisler Order has shed light on dividing lines between classes of unstable theories. Additionally, one of the major results in a paper by Malliaris and Shelah [4] shows that theories, which have the SOP2−property, are maximal. This result was important in proving p = t, the oldest open problem in cardinal invariants. We will begin with many deﬁnitions as well as examples to provide the reader with some intuition. We will leave most of the proofs which relate to the Keisler Order to the last two sections. The two big theorems we prove at the end can be found in Keisler’s original paper on the topic [3].
Date: AUGUST 29, 2014.
1
2 KYLE GANNON
2. Notation and Basic Definitions
This paper will assume at least one course in basic ﬁrst-order model theory. However, in this section, we will go over some of the necessary terminology and theorems required to understand this paper. A language L = {f1,f2,...,R1,R2,...,c1,c2,..} is a collection of (n-ary) function, (n-ary) relation, and constant symbols (sometimes called non-logical symbols). Languages also contain logical symbols, i.e. ∧,∨,¬,→, equality, and parentheses, as well as (object-level quantiﬁcation) ∀,∃. A formula in a language is simply a grammatically coherent string of logical symbols which may or may not have free variables (for instance, x = x or (∃x)(S(x) = ¯ y) where ¯ y is a tuple of free variables and x is bounded). A theory T is a set of logical sentences with symbols from some ﬁxed language L. A complete theory is a maximally consistent set of sentences. A model, or a L−structure, is some set-sized mathematical object with an interpretation for each non-logical symbol in the language. 0 |=0 is a (semantic) binary relation between L-structures and sentences in the language L. We say a sentence ϕ is true in a model A by writing A |= ϕ. The following will be our notational habits. An arbitrary model will be denoted as A or B. Usually, we will denote indexing sets as I,J, and cardinals as α,β,κ. Every theory T will have a corresponding ﬁxed language L where the size of the underlying language is at most countable. The underlying set of a model A is formally written as dom(A). However, we will usually write A for dom(A), B for dom(B), etc. The terms power and cardinality are interchangable. A set X has the ﬁnite intersection property if and only if any ﬁnite intersection of elements is not empty. If A is a set, then P(A) is the power set of A and Pℵ0(A) is the collection of all ﬁnite subsets of A. Finally, we have some more formal deﬁnitions and theorems which we will be referring to. Deﬁnition 2.1. Let A be an L-structure. We let X ⊂ A. Then, (A,X), sometimes written (A,x)x∈X, is a model (in the expanded language L ∪X) where we treat the elements of X as constant symbols. Formally, this is known as a diagram 1.
Deﬁnition 2.2. A collection of sentences, ∆, is said to be satisfiable if there exists a model A such that A |= ∆. ∆ is said to be ﬁnitely satisﬁable if every ﬁnite subset of ∆ is satisﬁable.
Theorem 2.3. (Completeness): A set of sentences ∆ is consistent if and only if it is satisﬁable.
Theorem 2.4. (Compactness): A set of sentences ∆ is satisﬁable if and only if it is ﬁnitely satisﬁable. Deﬁnition 2.5. If A and B are two L−structures, we say that A is elementarily equivalent to B (written A ≡ B) if for any ϕ in L, we have A |= ϕ if any only if B |= ϕ. Deﬁnition 2.6. Let A, B be two L−structures. We say that A is isomorphic to B if there exists a bijection f : A → B such that f preserves functions, relations, and constant symbols.
1When X is some arbitrary subset of some ﬁxed size α, we will sometimes just write (A,α) and L(α) for the expanded model and language respectively.
INTRODUCTION TO THE KEISLER ORDER 3
For a more detailed introduction, we refer the reader to the ﬁrst few sections of any basic model theory text (e.g. Chang & Keisler [2]).
3. Ultrapowers
Ultrapower constructions are one of the two central concepts necessary to un–––derstanding the Keisler Order. However, before we can deﬁne ultrapowers, we have to ﬁrst get an intuition for ultraﬁlters and ultraproducts.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let I be an indexing set. We say that D is a ﬁlter over I if D is a non-empty subset of P(I) with the following properties: 1. If X ∈ D and Z ⊃ X, then Z ∈ D. 2. If X,Y ∈ D, then X ∩Y ∈ D. Furthermore, we call D an ultraﬁlter if for any X ⊆ I, we have (exclusively) either X ∈ D or I − X ∈ D. Intuitively, we can think of D as a mathematical object that makes decisions about which subsets of I are large. D thinks the entire set is large, any set containing a large set is large, and the intersection of any two large sets is large. Note, D may not think that the countable/uncountable intersection of large sets is large. We will see later that ultraﬁlters without the countable intersection property are valuable and are central to our study.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Let D be a ﬁlter over I. We say that D is a principal ﬁlter if there exists X ⊂ I such that D = {Y ⊆ I : X ⊂ Y}. We call any ﬁlter which is not principal a nonprincipal (or free) ﬁlter. Example 3.3. (Principal Ultraﬁlter): Let I = N and let D = {X ⊆ N : 3 ∈ X}. Then, D is a principal ultraﬁlter over I.
Example 3.4. (Nonprincipal Ultraﬁlter): It is provable that one cannot construct an example (since the existence of a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter is equivalent to a weak version of choice). There are models of ZF where there do not exist any nonprincipal ultraﬁlters. However, the constructions of these models of ZF require complex forcing arguments not suitable for this paper [1].
For the remainder of this paper, every ultraﬁlter will be a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter. Furthermore, we will assume the full power of ZFC and thus never worry about the existence of ultraﬁlters (in general). The next two facts follow quickly from the deﬁnitions and are left unproven.
Proposition 3.5. No free ultraﬁlter contains any ﬁnite sets.
Proposition 3.6. Let A be a collection of subsets of I such that A has the ﬁnite intersection property. Then A can be extended to an ultraﬁlter over I. Let I be an indexing set of cardinality α and let{A}i∈I be a collection of models.Let Qi∈I A be the cartesian product of these models. Note that the elements ofQ i∈I A can be seen as functions from I into {A}i∈I or as an α−termed sequences of elements where the ηth term (for η < α) is an element of Aη. If f,g are elements ofQi∈I Ai, we say that f is D−equivalent to g (written as f ≡D g) if and only if f and g agree on a large set. Formally, f ≡D g ⇐⇒ {i ∈ I : f(i) = g(i)}∈ D Proposition 3.7. If D is a ﬁlter, then ≡D is an equivalence relation overQi∈I Ai.
4 KYLE GANNON
Deﬁnition 3.8. (Ultraproduct): Let I be an indexing set and let D be an ultraﬁlter over I. An ultraproduct of L−structures is deﬁned as, Y i∈I A/D = {fD : f ∈Y i∈I Ai} For notational purposes, we will always have our I’s ﬁxed and so we will writeQ i∈I Ai/D asQD Ai. In some sense, ultraproducts are similar to quotient spaces in topology. We are simply taking elements in our Cartesian product and gluing them together. Now, the following theorem demonstrates the strength of ultraproducts in model theory.
Theorem 3.9. (Los’s Theorem): Let D be an ultraﬁlter over I. Then, for any f1,...,fn ∈QD Ai, we have that Y D Ai |= ϕ(f1,...,fn) ⇐⇒ {i ∈ I : Ai |= ϕ(f1(i),...,fn(i))}∈ D So what does this theorem actually mean? First of all, note that if each Ai agrees on some (ﬁrst-order) sentences in L, thenQD Ai also agrees on that sentence. In fact, if D thinks some subset of I is large, and all the models of the large set agree (disagree) on some sentence, thenQD Ai also agrees (disagrees) on that sentence. Free ultraproducts can be thought of as averaging on an inﬁnite set. They pick up on what is happening in general while forgetting about small perturbations and outliers. We will consider the following example to give an intuition on how ultraproducts work.
Example 3.10. First note that the axioms of an algebraically closed ﬁeld are ﬁrst-orderizable in the language L = {0,1,+,×}. We will denote ACF to mean algebraically closed ﬁeld while ACFp will mean algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic p. Let P denote the set of standard primes. Furthermore, let Ap |= ACFp and so each model, Ap is an algebraically closed ﬁeld of characteristic p. Let D be a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter of P. Now, we consider the objectQD Ai. Note that since Ai |= ACF for all i ∈ P, it follows thatQD Ai |= ACF and soQD Ai is an algebraically closed ﬁeld. We will now ﬁnd this ﬁeld’s characteristic. By proposition 3.5, there is no ﬁnite set in D. Since D is an ultraﬁlter, this means that D contains all coﬁnite sets. Deﬁne ϕi, for all i ∈N as follows: ϕi ≡¬(1 + 1 + 1... + 1 | {z } i = 0) For i ∈N, Aj |= ϕi for j 6= i. Hence, we know that ϕi is true on a coﬁnite subset of P. Therefore,QD Ai cannot have characteristic i for any i ∈ N 2. SinceQD Ai is a ﬁeld and must have some characteristic, it has characteristic 0. Deﬁnition 3.11. (Ultrapower): If I is an indexing set and D is an ultraﬁlter over I, thenQD Ai is an ultrapower if for any i,j ∈ I, we have that Ai ∼ = Aj. Since the indexing of our models no longer provides a method of diﬀerentiation we will simply write ultrapowers asQD A when I is ﬁxed. This construction, in relation to ultraproducts, might seem a little odd at ﬁrst. We already know the exact set of ﬁrst-order sentences thatQD A satisﬁes. The proof thatQD A ≡ A 2Recall that ﬁelds cannot have composite characteristic anyway.
INTRODUCTION TO THE KEISLER ORDER 5
is a trivial corollary to Los’s theorem. The following example begins to show how ultrapowers can be diﬀerent from the models used to construct them. Example 3.12. Let A = (N;≤,S) where ≤ has its normal interpretation and S is interpreted as the unary successor function 3. We let I be countable and let D be a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter over I. Note that (N;≤,S) is well-ordered. We will show thatQD A is not. Consider the element f = (1,2,3,4,...) ∈QD A. Notice that for every m ∈ N, m ≤ f(i) is true on a coﬁnite set and as a result, true on a large set. Therefore, the element f is larger than every standard natural number. Furthermore, it is easy to show that N |= (∀x)(x 6= 0 → (∃y)(S(y) = x)). This statement simply reads: Every element not equal to 0 has a direct predecessor. Thus, we can ﬁnd an inﬁnite descending chain beginning with f. The chain begins like this: (1,2,3,4,5,...) (0,1,2,3,4,...) (0,0,1,2,3,...) . . . We know that this chain does not terminate after ﬁnitely many steps, since if it did, then f would be some standard natural number. SinceQD A has an inﬁnite descending chain, we know thatQD A is not well ordered. Now, if you know some basic logic, you should be making a connection with the compactness theorem. Ultrapowers and ultraproducts are tools which apply the compactness theorem. However, while compactness simply proves that a certain model exists, ultrapowers and ultraproducts give us much more control over the models we are constructing. Finally, in this section, we will deﬁne regular ultraﬁlters. Deﬁnition 3.13. Let D be a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter over some inﬁnite indexing set I. We say that D is a (β,α)−regular ultraﬁlter if there is a subset X of D such that 1. |X| = α. 2. For any subset Y of X such that |Y| = β, we have thatTY = ∅. We drop the (β,α) notation and just call an ultraﬁlter D regular if β = ω and α = |I|. We also call X a regular subset of D if the above properties holds for X. Since this is the type of ultraﬁlter we actually need for the deﬁnition of the Keisler Order, we will prove that D regular ultraﬁlters exist. Lemma 3.14. (Regular Ultraﬁlter Existence): For every inﬁnite cardinal κ, there exists a regular ultraﬁlter over κ. Proof. Let Pℵ0(κ) be the set of all ﬁnite subsets of κ. Note that |Pℵ0(κ)| = κ. Let f : Pℵ0(κ) → κ be a bijection and for each β ∈ κ, deﬁne Yβ = {i ∈ I : β = f−1(i)}. Now, consider A = {Yβ : β ∈ κ}. It is clear that |A| = κ. Recall that if A has the ﬁnite intersection property, then A can be extended to an ultraﬁlter. Consider: n \ j=1 Yβj = n \ j=1 {i ∈ I : βj ∈ f−1(i)d} 3Note that S can be deﬁned in the language {≤}. We have added S to our language to simplify our arguments.
6 KYLE GANNON
By deﬁnition, we have
= {i ∈ I : β1,...,βn ∈ f−1(i)}6= ∅ The inequality follows from the fact that f is a bijection from Pℵ0(κ) to κ. Therefore, A has the ﬁnite intersection property and may be extended into an ultraﬁlter. It should also be clear that the intersection of countable subsets of A are empty and so A is our regular subset of its ultraﬁlter extension.  
4. Saturation and Satisfaction
While ultrapowers are necessary for understanding the Keisler Order, this topic alone is not suﬃcient. Another key ingredient of the Keisler Order is saturation. This concept, along with satisfaction, will bring the Keisler Order into view. Deﬁnition 4.1. Let A be a model in a language L. Let X ⊆ A. We say that ρ is an n−type over X in A if 1. ρ is a collection of formulas in n free variables in the language L∪X (i.e. ρ is of the form ∪i∈I{ϕi(y1,...,yn)} where ϕi(y1,...,yn) are in L∪X). 2. For any ﬁnite subset ρ0 of ρ, there is some (c1,...,cn) ∈ A such that A |= ϕi(c1,...,cn) for all ϕi ∈ ρ0. We say that an n−type ρ is complete if and only if it is maximally consistent. Equivalently, ρ is a complete n−type if for any formula ψ(y1,...,yn) in n free variables, (exclusively) either ψ(y1,...,yn) ∈ ρ or ¬ψ(y1,...,yn) ∈ ρ. Note that every element of a model has a corresponding complete 1-type (over X ⊂ A). In fact, every ﬁxed n−tuple in any model has a corresponding complete n−type (over X ⊂ A). To demonstrate this, consider the following: if we let (a1,...,an) be a tuple of elements in A, let ρ ≡{φ(y1,...,yn) : (A,x,a1,...,an)x∈X |= φ(a1,...,an)} . Deﬁnition 4.2. (Satisfaction of 1-Types): Let ρ be a complete 1−type in one free variable. We say that ρ is satisﬁed/realized in A if there exists an a in A such that (A,a) |= ϕ(a) for all ϕ(x) ∈ ρ. We let S1(X) be the collection of all (consistent) complete 1-types over X ⊂ A Remark 4.3. Note that the above deﬁnition can be clearly extended to n−types and has corresponding collections, Sn(X).
Deﬁnition 4.4. (κ - Saturation): Let κ be some inﬁnite cardinal. We say that a structure A is κ−saturated if for every X ⊆ A with |X| < κ, all the types in S1(X) are realized in A. Proposition 4.5. If A is κ−saturated and |X| < κ, then every type in Sn(X) is realized in A.
Proposition 4.6. Not every theory has a saturated model in every cardinality.
Before we go any further with our deﬁnition building, we will give an indepth example.
INTRODUCTION TO THE KEISLER ORDER 7 Example 4.7. ((Q;<)): Let us consider Q in the language {<}. We will ﬁnd that there does not exist an ℵ1−saturated model of size ℵβ for ℵ0 ≤ ℵβ < 2ℵ0. The problem here is that we have continuum many 1-types which are deﬁnable in L over Q. Better yet, we are showing that S1(Q) = 2ℵ0 4. Consider any two (distinct, irrational) real numberes, s and r. We will write ρr and ρs as their complete corresponding 1−types over Q. Without loss of generality, we assume that s < r. Since s 6= r and Q is dense inside the reals, we have that there exists q ∈Q such that (x < q) ∈ ρs and (x > q) ∈ ρr. Hence, every real number corresponds to a diﬀerent (complete) 1-type over a countable subset of the model (where the countable subset is the entire model itself). Therefore, the ℵ1−saturated model is at least size 2ℵ0 (since |R| = 2ℵ0). However, (R;<) is not a ℵ1−saturated model of the theory of Th(Q,<). Let( D,<) be a ℵ1−saturated model. We will show that (D,<) realizes a type over Q that (R,<) does not realize. Consider the type ρξ = {x < q : q ∈ Q}∪{x > 0}. First note, that since the rationals are dense in themselves, no elements of Q realize this type. However, one can easily show that ρ is ﬁnitely satisﬁable. By the compactness theorem, we note that ρξ is consistent. Therefore, it must be satisﬁed in our ℵ1−saturated model (since it is deﬁnable over a countable subset of our underlying set). Let a be the element of D which satisﬁes this type. Note that for any q ∈Q, we have that q < 0 or q > a. Suppose that r ∈R and r = a. Since the rationals are dense in the reals, then there must be some p ∈Q such that 0 < p < r. But this a contradiction. Hence, (R,<) is not ℵ1−saturated.
5. An Early Application
We have just deﬁned a lot of new machinery, but it is probably still unclear how ultrapowers and saturation relate to one another. This section is dedicated to exhibiting the interaction of the two.
Deﬁnition 5.1. (Countably Incomplete Ultraﬁlter): An ultraﬁlter is said to be countably incomplete if there exists a subset X of D such that |X| = ℵ0 and TX = ∅. These ultraﬁlters are much weaker than regular ﬁlters, so our theorem will be very general. We are going to show that any ultrapower, using a countably incomplete ultraﬁlter, is ℵ1−saturated. However, we will need the following lemma ﬁrst.
Lemma 5.2. Let D be a countably incomplete ultraﬁlter. Then, there exists a countable descending chain I = I0 ⊂ I1 ⊂ I2 ⊂ ..., such thatTn∈ω In = ∅. Proof. Since D is an ultraﬁlter, we know that I ∈ D. Since D is countably incomplete, we know that there exists a set X ⊂ D such that |X| = ℵ0 andTX = ∅. Let {Y1,...,Yn,...} be a well-ordering of the elements of X. Deﬁne
Jn =
n \ i=1
Yi
4We are actually showing that S1(Q) ≥ 2ℵ0. The other direction follows from the fact that there are at most 2ℵ0−many deﬁnable 1−types over a countable set in a countable language.
8 KYLE GANNON
Since D is closed under intersection, it is closed under ﬁnite intersection. Therefore, Jn ∈ D for all n < ω. Furthermore, it is clear that Jn ⊇ Jn+1 and that we have the following equality \ i∈ω Jn = ∅ We also know that for each Jn, there exists some Jm such that Jn ) Jm, for some m > n. If this was not the case, thenTi∈ω Ji = Jm. Now, we can choose a subsequence of {Ji}i∈ω such that Ji+1 is a proper subset of Ji for each i. By well-ordering this set in the obvious way, we have found the collection that we are looking for.   Theorem 5.3. Let L be countable and let D be a countably incomplete ultraﬁlter over some inﬁnite set I. Then, for any collection {Ai}i∈I of L−structures, we have thatQD Ai is ℵ1−saturated. Proof. Let ∆(x) be a set of formulas (with one free variable) in the language L1 = L(ℵ0). It suﬃces to show that if each ﬁnite subset of ∆(x) is satisﬁed inQD Ai, then ∆(x) is realized inQD Ai. Suppose that each ﬁnite subset of ∆(x) is realized inQD Ai. Because L1 is countable, we know that ∆(x) is countable. Therefore, we can well order our elements of ∆(x) as follows; ∆(x) = {δ1(x),δ2(x),...} Since D is countably incomplete, we know that there exists a descending chain I = I0 ⊃ I1 ⊃ I2 ⊃ ... such thatTn∈ω In = ∅. Now, we let X0 = I0 and deﬁne Xn = In ∩{i ∈ I : Ai |= (∃x)(δ1 ∧...∧δn)} Recall that we assumed that every ﬁnite subset of ∆(x) is satisﬁed in QD Ai. Therefore, by Los’s Theorem, we have that {i ∈ I : Ai |= (∃x)(δ1∧...∧δn)} is large (hence, it is in D). Since In is also in D, we know by deﬁnition of a ﬁlter that Xn is in D for each n ∈N. Further note thatTn∈ω Xn = ∅ because of the following \ n∈ω Xn = \ n∈ω (In ∩{i ∈ I : Ai |= (∃x)(δ1 ∧...∧δn)}) = \ n∈ω (In)∩\ n∈ω ({i ∈ I : Ai |= (∃x)(δ1 ∧...∧δn)}) ∅∩\ n∈ω ({i ∈ I : Ai |= (∃x)(δ1 ∧...∧δn)}) = ∅ Furthermore, we also know that Xn ⊃ Xn+1. Now, for all i ∈ I, there is a largest n(i) < ω such that i ∈ Xn(i) Now, we ﬁnd an elementQD Ai which satisﬁes ∆(x). We are constructing a function f. If n(i) = 0, let f(i) be any arbitrary a in Ai. If n(i) > 0, choose f(i) ∈ Ai such that Ai |= δ1(f(i))∧...∧δn(i)(f(i)) Note that for any i ∈ Xn, we have that n ≤ n(i) and therefore Ai |= δ(f(i)). Since this is a large set, by Los’s theorem, we have thatQD Ai |= δn(fD) for all n > 0. Therefore, fD satisﬁes ∆(x) inQD Ai. We have ﬁnished the proof.   Remark 5.4. Note that every regular ultraﬁlter is countably incomplete.
INTRODUCTION TO THE KEISLER ORDER 9 Corollary 5.5. If D is a nonprincipal ultraﬁlter over N and {Ai}i∈N is a collection of L−structures, thenQD A is ℵ1−saturated. Proof. By the theorem above, it suﬃces to show that every nonprincipal ultraﬁlter over N is countably incomplete. Recall that since D is nonprincipal, it contains all coﬁnite sets. Let C be the collection of all coﬁnite sets in D. Recall also that |Pℵ0(N)| = ℵ0. We have a natural bijection f : Pℵ0(N) → C deﬁned by: f(S) = N−S Now, let I0 = N and deﬁne In+1 = In −n It is clear that In ∈ D and that In ⊃ In+1 for n ∈ ω. Finally, for sake of condtradiction, suppose that \ n∈ω In 6= ∅ Then, there exists some x in the natural numbers such that x ∈Tn∈ω In. However, consider Ix+1. By deﬁnition, Ix+1 = Ix −x which shows that x 6∈Tn∈ω In. Hence, we have a contradiction and soTn∈ω In = ∅. Therefore, D must be countably incomplete and soQD Ai is ℵ1−saturated by the previous theorem.   6. The Order
Now that we have all the necessary deﬁnitions in place, we can ﬁnally deﬁne the Keisler Order. Deﬁnition 6.1. (Keisler Order): We say that a theory T1 Eκ T2 if for any A1 |= T1, A2 |= T2, and regular ultraﬁtler D over κ, we have that ifQD A2 is κ+−saturated thenQD A1 must be κ+−saturated. Now we say that T1 E T2 if for every inﬁnite cardinal, κ, we have that T Eκ T2. This second deﬁnition, E, is the Keisler Order. Note that the ultraﬁlter construction is model theoretic while the order is on the theories of the models. Therefore, we still need to show that this deﬁnition is well deﬁned (i.e. that it is not dependent on our choice of model).
Theorem 6.2. Fix some language L and some indexing set I. Furthermore, suppose that A ≡ B over L and D is a regular ultraﬁlter over I. Then we have thatQD A is α+−saturated if and only ifQD B is α+−saturated. Proof. First note that the two directions have the same proof. Assume, without loss of generality, thatQD B is α+−saturated. Let X = {Yi}i∈I be a regular subset of D. Let ∆ be a collection of formulas in one free variable (in the expanded language L(α)) such that ∆ is ﬁnitely satisﬁable in (QD A,α) and |∆| ≤ α. It suﬃces to show that ∆ is realized in (QD A,α) Since |∆|≤|X| = α, let h be an injection from Σ into X. We deﬁne ∆(i) = {δ ∈ ∆ : i ∈ h(δ)} and X(i) = h(∆(i)) = {h(δ) : δ ∈ ∆(i)} Note that ∆(i) is ﬁnite. If ∆(i) were inﬁnite, then we could ﬁnd a inﬁnite collection of elements in X such that their intersection would be non-empty. Finding this collection would contradict the regularity of X.
10 KYLE GANNON
Also, since X(i) is the image of an injection from a ﬁnite set, we have that |X(i)| = |∆(i)| < ω. Let a =  ai i∈I/D, and for each i let a(i) = ai. Let Γ(i) be the set of all sentences of L(α) of the form {(∃x)^ j∈s δj : s 6= 0,s ∈P(∆(i)),δj ∈ ∆(i)} Note that Γ(i) is a valid collection of ﬁrst-order sentences since ∆(i) is ﬁnite. Γ(i) is simply every possible subcollection of sentences in ∆(i). Since Γ(i) is ﬁnite and Ai ≡ Bi we can choose b(i) in Bi such that Γ(i)∩Th(Ai,a(i)) = Γ(i)∩Th(Bi,b(i)) for all i ∈ I. Therefore, we have chosen our b(i)’s such that each subset of ∆(i) is realized in (Ai,a(i)) if and only if it is realized in (Bi,b(i)). Let b = bi i∈I/D. Therefore, b is an element ofQD B. We will now show that ∆ is ﬁnitely satisﬁable in (QD B,b). Let δ1,...,δn ∈ ∆ and let ϕ = (∃x) ^ 1≤j≤n δj Note that {i ∈ I : ϕ ∈ Γ(i)} ∈ D. Since ∆ is ﬁnitely satisﬁable in (QD A,a), ϕ holds inQD A and therefore, ϕ holds in (Ai,a(i)) on a large set. Now, from above, we have that for every i ∈ I such that (Ai,a(i)) |= ϕ, we have that (Bi,b(i)) |= ϕ. Therefore, ϕ holds in (Bi,b(i)) for a large subset of D. Then{i ∈ I : (Bi,b(i)) |= ϕ} is a large set and so ϕ holds in (QD B,b). Because ∆ is ﬁnitely satisﬁable in (QD B,b), ∆ has power at most α, andQD Bis α+−saturated, there exists an element g/D ∈QD B such that g/D realizes ∆. For each i ∈ I, we let T(i) be the set of all δ ∈ ∆(i) such that g(i) satisﬁes δ is( Bi,b(i)). Since T(i) is ﬁnitely satisﬁable in (Bi,b(i)), it is also ﬁnitely satisﬁable in (A,a(i)). Note that since T(i) is ﬁnite, we can ﬁnd an element f(i) ∈ Ai such that f(i) realizes T(i) in (A,a(i)). Finally, we must now show that f/D = f(i) i∈I/D satisﬁes ∆ in (QD Ai,a).Let δ ∈ ∆. Then δ ∈ ∆(i) on a large set. Also, g/D satisﬁes δ in (QD B,b), so g(i)satisﬁes δ in (Bi,b(i)) for on a large subset of D. Thus, we have that δ ∈ T(i) fora large subset of D. It follows that f(i) satisﬁes δ in (Ai,a(i)) for a large subset of D, and therefore, f/D satisﬁes ∆ inQD A.   7. Existence of a Maximal Class
In this section, we will prove the existence of a maximal class. The theories we will show are maximal, in some sense, can deﬁne the concept of saturation. The theories encode the idea of saturation. Note that the following proof provides a suﬃcient condition for maximality. Deﬁnition –7.1. (Weak Ideals): Let n ∈N. We say that T is a weak ideal over n if 1. T ⊆P(n) and T 6= ∅. 2. If t ∈ T and ∅6= s ⊂ t, then s ∈ T. The following example is the key concept to keep in mind when understanding why weak ideals are important.
INTRODUCTION TO THE KEISLER ORDER 11
Example 7.2. Let ∆ = {δ1,...,δn}. Suppose that A |= δi1 ∧...∧δim where m ≤ n. Then, if we let, T = {s ∈P(n) : A |=^ k∈s δk} then, T is a weak ideal over n. Deﬁnition 7.3. (Versatile Formula): Let ϕ(x0, ¯ x) be some formula in a language L. We say that ϕ(x0, ¯ x) is a versatile formula in some L−structure, A, if for everyn ∈N and every weak ideal T over n, we have that A |= (∃x0, ¯ x)  ^ t∈T (∃x0)^ m∈t ϕ(x0, ¯ x) ∧ ^ t6∈T ¬(∃x0)^ m∈t ϕ(x0, ¯ x)   At ﬁrst glance, the versatile formula might seem a little daunting. Note that in the standard model of arithmetic, (N;+,×,0,1), the formula, ϕ(x0,x1) ≡ (∃z)[(z×x0 = x1)∧(x0 6= 1)] is a versatile formula. ϕ just states that x0 is a non-trivial divisor of x1. Theorem 7.4. There exists a maximal class with respect to the Keisler Order.
Proof. We show that if A has a versatile formula, the A is maximal. Let D be a regular ultraﬁlter and suppose thatQD A is α+−saturated. It suﬃce to show that for any (countable) language L0 and any L0−structure B,QD B is α+−saturated. Let b be an α−termed sequence inQD Bi. Let ∆ be a collection of formulas in one free variable (in the language L(α)) such that |∆|≤ α. Also, suppose that ∆ is ﬁnitely satisﬁable in (QD B,b). Let X be a regular subset of D. Let h : ∆ → X be an injection. Again, set ∆(i) = {δ ∈ ∆ : i ∈ h(δ)} Notice that each ∆(i) is ﬁnite for the same reason as the previous theorem. Note also that (Y D Bi,b) =Y D (Bi,b(i)) Now, for i ∈ I we can write ∆(i) = {δ1,...,δn}. Let T = {t ⊂ n : t 6= 0,(Bi,b(i)) |= (∃x)^ m∈t (∃x0)δm} Then, we know that T is a weak ideal over n. Let ϕ(x0, ¯ x) be a versatile formula for A. Now, for each i ∈ I, we let a(δm,i) be the tuple of elements of Ai which satisfy ¯ x. Now, for every δ ∈ ∆, choose fδ to be a function from I intoQD A suchthat whenever δ ∈ ∆(i), fδ = a(δ,i). Finally, we set aδ = fδ/D.Since ∆ has size α, we the elements aδ can be put into correspondence with the constants in L(α). For every δ ∈ ∆, let ϕδ be the one-variable formula of L(α) generated by replacing x by aδ. It is now the case that for any i ∈ I and δ1,...,δn ∈ ∆(i), δ1 ∧...∧δm holds in( B,b(i)) if and only if ϕδ1 ∧...∧ϕδn holds (A,a(i)). Since δ1 ∧...∧δm holds on a large subset of D, we also know that ϕδ1 ∧...∧ϕδn holds on a large subset of D. Therefore, ϕδ1 ∧...∧ϕδn is satisﬁed in (QD A,a) and the set Φ = {ϕδ : δ ∈ ∆} is ﬁnitely satisﬁable in (QD A,a). SinceQD A is α+−saturated, Φ is realized in QD A. Let g/D satisfy Φ. Now choose, for each i, and element f(i) ∈ B which
12 KYLE GANNON
satisﬁes δ whenever δ ∈ ∆(i) and g(i) satisﬁes φδ. Then for each δ ∈ ∆, f(i) satisﬁes δ on a large set, therefore f/D satisﬁes ∆ in (QD B,b). Hence,QD B is α+−saturated.   Note that by our theorem in the last section, we now know that the theory of arithmetic is maximal with respect to the Keisler Order. However, a necessary and suﬃcient condition for maximality is still unknown. As stated at the beginning of the paper, the complete order type of the Keisler Order is still unknown. It is known that there exists a minimal class, at least two non-minimal and non-maximal classes, and a maximal class.
Acknowledgments. It is a pleasure to thank my mentors, Nir Gadish and Jonny Stephenson, for their patience and guidance throughout this project. This project would have been near impossible without them. Furthermore, I would also like to thank Professor Maryanthe Malliaris for suggesting the topic as well as her lectures at the REU program this summer. The lectures gave direction to my project as a whole.
References
[1] Blass, A. ”A Model Without Ultraﬁlters.” Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci., Ser. Sci. Math. Astronom. Pyhs. 25 (1977), no. 4, 329-331. [2] Chang, C. C., and H. J. Keisler. Model Theory. Amserdam: North-Holland Pub., 1973. Print. [3] Keisler, H. J. ”Ultraproducts which are not Saturated.” The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 32, No. 1 (Mar., 1967), pp. 23-46 [4] Malliaris, M. and S. Shelah. ”General Topology Meets Model Theory, on P and T.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110.33 (2013): 13300-3305. Web. [5] S. Shelah. Classification Theory and the number of non-isomorphic models, rev. ed. NorthHolland
