
# 关于几何学的等同公理 - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客

2019年03月09日 18:51:31[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：90


今日，袁萌阅读希尔伯特《几何学基础》，读到第十一页等同公理（IV 1-6）时，知道当年希尔伯特为引入平面坐标系（引入平角、直角）耗费了不少心思。）
记得，1957年，袁萌进入南京大学数学天文系学习，解析几何直角坐标系解析几何直角坐标系是韩继昌教授，今年90大几了，人还健在。恩师的教诲，袁萌永不忘。
学
习微积分必须从平面解析几何直角坐标系开始入手。大学生学微积，用手机，我们不能忘记希尔伯特的教诲。
请看本文附件。
袁萌  陈启清  3月9日
附件：**《几何学基础》**等同公理内容：
§6. GROUP IV. AXIOMS OF CONGRUENCE.
The axioms of this group de ne the idea of congruence or displacement Segments stand in a certain relation to one another which is described by the word “congruent.”
IV, I. If A, B are two points on a straight line a, and if A0 is a point upon the same or another traightline a0,then,uponagivenside on the straight line a0,we analways  nd one  and only one point B0 so that the segment AB(or BA) s congruent to the  segment A0B0. We indicate this relation by writing AB≡ A0B0. Every segment is congruent to itself; that is, we always have AB≡ AB. We can state the above axiom brie y by saying that every segment can be laid off upon a given side of a given point of a given straight line in one and  only one way.
IV, 2. If a segment AB is congruent to the segment A0B0 and also to the segment A00B00, then the segment A0B0 is congruent to the segment A00B00; that is, if AB ≡ A0B0 and AB≡ A00B00, then A0B0 ≡ A00B00.
IV,3. Let AB and BC betwo segments of astraight line a which have no points in common aside from the point B, and, furthermore, let A0B0 and B0C0 be two segments of the same or of another straight line a0 having, likewise, no point other than B0 in common. Then, if AB≡ A0B0 and BC ≡ B0C0, we have AC ≡ A0C0.
9
Fig. 8.
Definitions. Let α be any arbitrary plane and h, k any two distinct half-rays lying in α and emanating from the point O so as to form a part of two different straight lines. We call the system formed by these two half-rays h, k an angle and represent it by the symbol ∠(h,k) or ∠(k,h). From axioms II, 1–5, it follows readily that the half-rays h and k, taken together with the point O, divide the remaining points of the plane a into two regions having the following property: If A is a point of one region and B a point of the other, then every broken line joining A and B either passes through O or has a point in common with one of the half-rays h, k. If, however, A, A0 both lie within the same region, then it is always possible to join these two points by a broken line which neither passes through O nor has a point in common with either of the half-rays h, k. One of these two regions is distinguished from the other in that the segment joining any two points of this region lies entirely within the region. The region so characterised is called the interior of the angle (h,k). To distinguish the other region from this, we call it the exterior of the angle (h,k). The half rays h and k are called the sides of the angle, and the point O is called the vertex of the angle.
IV, 4. Let an angle (h,k) be given in the plane α and let a straight line a0 be given in a plane α0. Suppose also that, in the plane α, a de nite side of the straight line a0 be assigned. Denote by h0 a half-ray of the straight line a0 emanating from a point O0 of this line. Then in the plane α0 there is one and only one half-ray k0 such that the angle (h,k), or (k,h), is congruent to the angle (h0,k0) and at the same time all interior points of the angle (h0,k0) lie upon the given side of a0. We express this relation by means of the notation ∠(h,k)≡∠(h0,k0) Every angle is congruent to itself; that is, ∠(h,k)≡∠(h,k) or ∠(h,k)≡∠(k,h) We say, brie y, that every angle in a given plane can be laid off upon a given side of a given half-ray in one and only one way.
IV, 5. If the angle (h,k) is congruent to the angle (h0,k0) and to the angle (h00,k00), then the angle (h0,k0) is congruent to the angle (h00,k00); that is to say, if ∠(h,k) ≡∠(h0,k0) and ∠(h,k)≡∠(h00,k00), then∠(h0,k0)≡∠(h00,k00).
10
Suppose we have given a triangle ABC. Denote by h, k the two half-rays emanating from A and passing respectively through B and C. The angle (h,k) is then said to be the angle included by the sides AB and AC, or the one opposite to the side BC in the triangle ABC. Itcontainsalloftheinteriorpointsofthetriangle ABC andisrepresented by the symbol ∠BAC, or by ∠A.
IV, 6. If, in the two triangles ABC and A0B0C0 the congruences AB≡ A0B0, AC ≡ A0C0, ∠BAC ≡∠B0A0C0 hold, then the congruences ∠ABC ≡∠A0B0C0and∠ACB≡∠A0C0B0 also hold.
Axioms IV, 1–3 contain statements concerning the congruence of segments of a straight line only. They may, therefore, be called the linear axioms of group IV. Axioms IV, 4, 5 contain statements relating to the congruence of angles. Axiom IV, 6 gives the connection between the congruence of segments and the congruence of angles. Axioms IV, 4–6 contain statements regarding the elements of plane geometry and may be called the plane axioms of group IV.
§7. CONSEQUENCES OF THE AXIOMS OF CONGRUENCE.
Suppose the segment AB is congruent to the segment A0B0. Since, according to axiom IV, 1, the segment AB is congruent to itself, it follows from axiom IV, 2 that A0B0 is congruent to AB; that is to say, if AB ≡ A0B0, then A0B0 ≡ AB. We say, then, that the two segments are congruent to one another. Let A, B, C, D,..., K, L and A0, B0, C0, D0,..., K0, L0 be two series of points on the straight lines a and a0, respectively, so that all the corresponding segments AB and A0B0, AC and A0C0, BC and B0C0,..., KL and K0L0 are respectively congruent, then the two series of points are said to be congruent to one another. A and A0, B and B0,..., L and L0 are called corresponding points of the two congruent series of points. From the linear axioms IV, 1–3, we can easily deduce the following theorems:
Theorem 9. If the  rst of two congruent series of points A, B, C, D,..., K, L and A0, B0, C0, D0,..., K0, L0 is so arranged that B lies between A and C, D,..., K, L, and C between A, B and D,..., K, L, etc., then the points A0, B0, C0, D0,..., K0, L0 of the second series are arranged in a similar way; that is to say, B0 lies between A0 and C0, D0,..., K0, L0, and C0 lies between A0, B0 and D0,..., K0, L0, etc.
11
Let the angle (h,k) be congruent to the angle (h0,k0). Since, according to axiom IV, 4, the angle (h,k) is congruent to itself, it follows from axiom IV, 5 that the angle (h0,k0) is congruenttotheangle (h,k). We say,then,thattheangles (h,k)and (h0,k0)arecongruent to one another. Definitions. Two angles having the same vertex and one side in common, while the sides not common form a straight line, are called supplementary angles. Two angles having a common vertex and whose sides form straight lines are called vertical angles. An angle which is congruent to its supplementary angle is called a right angle. Two triangles ABC and A0B0C0 are said to be congruent to one another when all of the following congruences are ful lled: AB≡ A0B0, AC ≡ A0C0, BC ≡ B0C0, ∠A≡∠A0, ∠B≡∠B0, ∠C ≡∠C0. Theorem 10. (First theorem of congruence for triangles). If, for the two triangles ABC and A0B0C0, the congruences AB≡ A0B0, AC ≡ A0C0, ∠A≡∠A0 hold, then the two triangles are congruent to each other.
Proof. From axiom IV, 6, it follows that the two congruences ∠B≡∠B0and∠C ≡∠C0 are ful lled, and it is, therefore, suf cient to show that the two sides BC and B0C0 are congruent. We will assume the contrary to be true, namely, that BC and B0C0 are not congruent, and show that this leads to a contradiction. We take upon B0C0 a point D0 such that BC ≡ B0D0. The two triangles ABC and A0B0D0 have, then, two sides and the included angle of the one agreeing, respectively, to two sides and the included angle of the other. It follows from axiom IV, 6 that the two angles BAC and B0A0D0 are also congruent to each other. Consequently, by aid of axiom IV, 5, the two angles B0A0C0 and B0A0D0 must be congruent.
Fig. 9.
This, however, is impossible, since, by axiom IV, 4, an angle can be laid off in one and only one way on a given side of a given half-ray of a plane. From this contradiction the theorem follows. We can also easily demonstrate the following theorem:

