# 实数的塔尔斯基公理化系统 - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2018年02月05日 07:02:16[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：274

在我们中国，中学生都知道有一个“实数”系统，但是，对实数的了解只限于直观层面，不能深入理解。
进入20世纪，各种数学分支都公理化了，实数也不例外。但是，实数的公理化方案有多种，各有特色，塔尔斯基公理化系统也是备选方案之一。
塔尔斯基是上世纪与哥德尔齐名的最伟大的数理逻辑学家，模型论的奠基人，而且是无穷小微积分教材作者J,Keisler的博士导师。
   说明：塔尔斯基是个传奇人物，国人知之甚少。
袁萌  2月5日
附：Tarski's axiomatization ofthe reals
In 1936, AlfredTarski set out an axiomatization of the real numbers and their arithmetic,consisting of only the 8 axioms shown below and a mere four primitive notions: theset of reals denoted R, a binary total order over R, denoted by infix <, abinary operation of addition over R, denoted by infix +, and the constant 1.
The literatureoccasionally mentions this axiomatization but never goes into detail,notwithstanding its economy and elegant metamathematical properties. Thisaxiomatization appears little known, possibly because of its second-ordernature.  
Tarski's axiomatizationcan be seen as a version of the more usual definition of real numbers as theunique Dedekind-complete ordered field; it is however made much more concise byusing unorthodox variants of standard algebraic axioms and other subtle tricks(see e.g. axioms 4 and 5, which combine together the usual four axioms ofabelian groups).
The term"Tarski's axiomatization of real numbers" also refers to the theoryof real closed fields, which Tarski showed completely axiomatizes thefirst-order theory of the structure 〈R, +, ·, <〉.
The axioms
Axioms of order (primitives: R, <):
Axiom 1
If x < y, then not y <x. That is, "<" is an asymmetric （非对称）relation.
Axiom 2
If x < z, there exists a ysuch that x < y and y < z. In other words, "<" is dense inR.
Axiom 3
"<" isDedekind-complete. More formally, for all X, Y ? R, if for all x ∈ X and y ∈ Y, x < y,then there exists a z such that for all x ∈ X and y ∈ Y, if z ≠ x and z ≠ y, then x < zand z < y.
To clarify the above statement somewhat, let X ? R and Y ? R. We now define two common English verbs ina particular way that suits our purpose:
X precedes Y if and only iffor every x ∈ X and every y ∈ Y, x < y.
The real number z separates Xand Y if and only if for every x ∈ X with x ≠ z and every y ∈ Y with y ≠ z, x < z andz < y.
Axiom 3 can then be stated as:
"If a set of realsprecedes another set of reals, then there exists at least one real numberseparating the two sets."
Axioms of addition (primitives: R, <, +):
Axiom 4
x + (y + z) = (x + z) + y.
Axiom 5
    For all x, y, there exists az such that x + z = y.
Axiom 6
    If x + y < z + w, then x< z or y < w.
Axioms for one (primitives: R, <, +, 1):
Axiom 7
    1 ∈ R.
Axiom 8
    1 < 1 + 1.
These axioms imply that R is a linearly ordered abelian group underaddition with distinguished element 1. R is also Dedekind-complete anddivisible.
Tarski stated, without proof, that these axioms gave a total ordering.The missing component was supplied in 2008 by Stefanie Ucsnay.[2]
This axiomatization does not give rise to a first-order theory, becausethe formal statement of axiom 3 includes two universal quantifiers over allpossible subsets of R. Tarski proved these 8 axioms and 4 primitive notionsindependent.
How these axioms imply a field
Tarski sketched the (nontrivial) proof of how these axioms andprimitives imply the existence of a binary operation called multiplication andhaving the expected properties, so that R is a complete ordered field underaddition and multiplication. This proof builds crucially on the integers withaddition being an abelian group and has its origins in Eudoxus' definition ofmagnituty.（全文完）
