# 拯救微积分学的基本定理 - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2017年10月06日 12:20:19[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：343
拯救微积分学的基本定理
2013年6月18日，无穷小放飞互联网之后，微积分学的许多重要定理被菲氏微积分的徒子徒孙们在网络上公开玷污（强奸）了、原意扭曲了，令人心痛、可气。怎么办呢？努力拯救之！
比如说，微积分学基本定理，这原本是一个基本定理，被这帮家伙说成是一个计算公式，叫什么“牛顿-莱布尼兹”公式，完全掩盖了它的理论内容。
袁萌10月6日
附：微积分学基本定理的原文，供参考。
第4.2节微积分学的基本定理
4.2 FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS
In this section we shall state five basic theorems about the integral,culminating in the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. Right now we can onlyapproximate a definite integral by the laborious computation of a finite Riemannsum. At the end of this section we will be in a position easily to computeexact values for many definite integrals. The key to the method is theFundamental Theorem. Our first theorem shows that we are free to choose anypositive infinitesimal we wish for dx in the definite integral.
THEOREM 1
Given a continuous function f on [a, b] and two positive infinitesimalsdx and du, the definite integrals with respect to dx and du are the same.
From now on when we write a definite integral _____f(x)dx, it isunderstood that dx is a positive infinitesimal. By theorem 1, it doesn’t matterwhich infinitesimal.
The proof of Theorem 1 is based on the following intuitive idea. Figure4.2.1 shows the two Riemann sums _____f(x)dx and ___ f(u) du. We see from the figurethat the difference ______f(x) dx -_____ f(u) du is a sum of rectangles ofinfinitesimal height. These difference rectangles all lie between thehorizontal lines y= -ε and y=ε, where ε is the largestheight. Thus -ε(b-a) ____ _____ f(x) dx-____f(u) du≤ε (b -a). Taking standardparts,
Figure 4.2.1
Theorem 1 shows that whenever Δx is positive infinitesimal, the Riemannsum is infinitely close to the definite integral,
This fact can also be expressed in terms of limits. It shows that theRiemann sum approaches the definite integral as Δx approaches 0 from above, insymbols
Given a continuous function f on an interval I, Theorem I shows thatthe definite integral is a real function of two variables a and b,
We now formally define the area as the definite integral shown inFigure 4.2.2.
Figure 4.2.2
DEFINITION
If f is continuous and f(x) ≥0 on[a,b], thearea of the region below the curve y=f(x) from a to b is defined as thedefinite integral:
The next two theorems give basic properties of the integral.
THEOREM 2 (The Rectangle Property)
Suppose f is continuous and has minimum value m and maximum value M ona closed interval [a, b]. Then
That is, the area of the region under the curve is between the area ofthe rectangle whose height is the minimum value of and the area of therectangle whose height is the maximum value of in the interval [a,b].
The Extreme Value Theorem is needed to show that the minimum value mand maximum value M exist. The rectangle of height m is called the inscribedrectangle of the region, and the rectangle of height M is called thecircumscribed rectangle. From Figure 4.2.3, we see that the inscribed rectangleis a subset of the region under the curve, which is in turn a subset of thecircumscribed rectangle. The Rectangle Property says that the area of theregion is between the areas of the inscribed and circumscribed rectangles.
Figure 4.2.3 the Rectangle Property
PROOF By Theorem 1, any positive infinitesimal may be chosen for dx.Let us choose a positive infinite hyperinteger H and let dx=(b-a) /H. Then dxevenly divides b-a; that is, the interval [a, b] is divided into H subintervalsof exactly the same length dx. Then
For each x, we have m≤ f(x)≤M. Adding up andtaking standard parts, we obtain the required formula.
One useful consequence of the Rectangle Property is that the integralof a positive function is positive and the integral of a negative function isnegative:
The definite integral of a negative function f(x)= -g(x) from a to b isjust the negative of the area of the region above the curve and below the xaxis.
This is because
f(x) dx = -g(x)dx,
(See Figure 4.2.4.)
Figure 4.2.4
THEOREM 3 (The Addition Property)
Suppose f is continuous on an interval I. Then for all a, b, c in I,
This property is illustrated in Figure 4.2.5 for the case a<b<c.The Addition Property holds even if the points a, b,c are in some other orderon the real line, such as c<a<b.
Figure 4.2.5
PROOF First suppose that a<b<c. Choose a dx that evenly dividesthe first interval length b -a. This simplifies our computation because itmakes b a partition point, b=a+H dx. Then, as Figure 4.2.6 suggests,
Taking standard parts we have the desired formula
Figure 4.2.6
To illustrate the other cases, we prove the Addition Property when
c<a<b. The previous case gives
Since reversing the endpoints changes the sign of the integral,
and the desired formula
follows.
The definite integral of a curve can be thought of as area even if thecurve crosses the x-axis. The curve in Figure 4.2.7 is positive from a to b andnegative from b to c, crossing the x-axis at b. The integral ___ f(x) dx is apositive number and the integral ___ f(x) dx is a negative number. By theAddition Property, the integral
is equal to the area from a to b minus the area from b to c. Thedefinite integral ___ f(x) dx always gives the net area between the x-axis andthe curve, counting areas above the x-axis as positive and areas below thex-axis as negative.
The definite integral __ f(t)dt is a real function of two variables uand v and does not depend on the dummy variable t. If we replace u by aconstant a and v by the variable x, we obtain a real function of one variablex, given by
Our fourth theorem states that this new function is continuous.
Figure 4.2.7
THEOREM 4
Let f be continuous on an interval 1. Choose a point a in 1. Then thefunction F(x) defined by
is continuous on 1.
SKETCH OF PROOF Let c be in 1, and let x be infinitely close to c andbetween the end points of 1. By the Addition Property.
and
This is the area of the infinitely thin strip under the curve y=f(t)between t=x and t=c (see Figure 4.2.8). The strip has width Δx=c -x. By theRectangle Property, its area is between m Δx and M Δx and hence is infinitelysmall. Therefore F(x) is infinitely close to F(c), and F is continuous on 1.
Figure 4.2.8
Our fifth theorem, the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, shows that thedefinite integral can be evaluated by means of antiderivatives. The process ofantidifferentiation is just the opposite of differentiation. To keep thingssimple, let I be an open interval, and assume that all functions mentioned havedomain I.
DEFINITION
Let f and F be functions with domain I. If f is the derivative of F,then F is called an antiderivative of f.
For example, suppose a particle is moving upward along the y-axis withvelocity v=f(t) and position y=F(t) at time t. The position y=F(t) is anantiderivative of the velocity v=f(t). We shall discuss antiderivatives in moredetail in the next section. We are now ready for the Fundamental Theorem.
FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF CALCULUS
Suppose f is continuous on its domain, which is an open interval I.
( i ) For each point a in I, the definite integral of f from a to xconsidered as a function of x is an antiderivative of f. That is,
(ii) If F is any antiderivative of f, then for any two points (a, b) inI the definite integral of f from a to b is equal to the difference F(b) -F(a),
The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus is important for two reasons.First, it shows the relation between the two main notions of Calculus: thederivative, which corresponds to velocity, and the integral, which correspondsto area. It shows that differentiation and integration are “inverse” processes.Second, it gives a simple method for computing many definite integrals.
EXAMPLE 1
(a) Find ____ cdx. Since cx is an antiderivative of c,
(b) Find ___ xdx. __x² is an antiderivative of x. Thus
The above example gives the same result that we got before but is muchsimpler. We can easily go further.
EXAMPLE 2 Find ___ x² dx. x3/3 is an antiderivative of x² because
Therefore
This gives the area of the region under the curve y=x² between a and b
(Figure 4.2.9).
Figure 4.2.9
If a particle moves along the y-axis with continuous velocity v=f(t),the position y=F(t) is an antiderivative of the velocity, because v=dy/dt. TheFundamental Theorem of Calculus shows that the distance moved (the change in y)between times t=a and t=b is equal to the definite integral of the velocity,
EXAMPLE 3 A particle moves along the y-axis with velocity v=8t3 cm/sec.How far does it move between times t= -1 and t= 2 sec? The function G(t)=2t4 isan antiderivative of the velocity v = 8t3. Thus the definite integral is
EXAMPLE 4 Find ____ dt (Figure 4.2.10). The function ___ is defined andcontinuous on the half-open interval [0,∝). But to applythe Fundamental Theorem we need a function continuous on an open interval thatcontains the limit points 0 and 4. We therefore define
This function is continuous on the whole real line. In particular it iscontinuous at 0 because if t≈ 0 then f(t) ≈ 0. The function
Figure 4.2.10
is an antiderivative of f. Then
In the next section we shall develop some methods for finding antiderivatives.The antiderivative of a very simple function may turn out to be a “new”function which we have not yet given a name.
EXAMPLE 5 The only way we can show that the function f(x) = ________has an antiderivative is to take a definite integral
This is a “new” function that cannot be expressed in terms ofalgebraic, trigonometric, and exponential functions without calculus.
The Fundamental Theorem cal also be used to find the derivative of afunction which is defined as a definite integral with a variable limit ofintegration.. This can be done without actually evaluating the integral.
EXAMPLE 6 let
and
EXAMPLE 7 Let y=
By the Chain Rule,
We conclude this section with a proof of the Fundamental Theorem ofCalculus.
PROOF (i) Let F(x) be the area under the curve y=f(t) from a to x,
Imagine that the vertical line cutting the t-axis at x moves to theright as in Figure 4.2.11
Figure 4.2.11
We show that the rate of change of F(x) is equal to the length f(x) ofthe moving vertical line.
Suppose x increases by an infinitesimal amount Δx> 0. Then
is the area of an infinitely thin strip of width Δx and heightinfinitely close to f(x). By the Rectangle Property the area of the strip isbetween the inscribed and circumscribed rectangles (Figure 4.2.12),
m Δx≤ F(x+Δx) - F(x) ≤M Δx.
Dividing by Δx, m≤_________ ≤ M.
Since f is continuous at x, the values m and M are both infinitelyclose to f(x),
and therefore
The proof is similar when Δx<0. Hence F'(x) =f(x).
Figure 4.2.12
PROOF (ii) Let F(x) be any antiderivative of f. Then, by(i),
In Section 3.7 on curve sketching, we saw that every function withderivative zero is constant. Thus
for some constant C0. Then
PROBLEMS FOR SECTION 4.2
In Problems 1-14, find an antiderivative of the given function.
1 f(x) =8___ 2 f(x) = 4/__
3 f(t) =3t² + 1 4 f(x) =5x3
5 f(t) =4 －3t² 6 f(z) =2/z²
7 f(s) =7s -3 8 f(t) =t² + t-2
9 f(x) =(x -6)² 10 f(u) =(5u + 1)²
11 f(y) = y3/2 12 f(x) =2/x__
13 f(x) =|x| 14 f(t) = |2t -4 |
15 If F '(x) = x + x² for all x, find F(1) - F(-1).
16 If F '(x) = x4 for all x, find F(2) - F(1).
17 If F '(t) = t1/3 for all t, find F(8) - F(0).
Evaluate the definite integrals in Problems 18-22.
18 __________ 19__________
20 __________ 21__________
22__________
In Problems 23-27 an object moves along the y-axis. Given the velocityv, find how far the object moves between the given times t0 and t1.
23 v =2t + 5, t0 =0, t1 =2
24 v =4 －t, t0 =1, t1 =4
25 v =3, t0 =2, t1 =6
26 v =3t², t0 =1, t1 =3
27 v =10t -2, t0 =1, t1 =100
In Problems28-32, find the area of the region under the curve y=f(x)from a to b.
28 y =4 －x², a = －2, b=2
29 y = ______, a = －2, b=2
30 y =9x －x², a = 0, b=3
31 y =__ －x, a =0, b=1
32 y = 3x?. a =1, b=8
33 If F '(t) = t-1 for all t and F(0) =2, find F(2).
34 If F '(x) = 1－x² for all x andF(3) =5, find F(-1).
□35 Suppose F(x) and G(x)have continuous derivatives and F '(x)+G'(x)=0 for all x.
Prove that F(x)+G(x) is constant.
□36 Suppose F(x) and G(x)have continuous derivatives such that F '(x)≤G'(x) for all x.
Prove that F(b)- F(a)≤G(b)- G(a)
Where a<b.
□37 Prove that a functionF(x) has a constant derivative if and only if F(x) is linear, i.e.,
of the form F(x)=ax +b.
□38 Prove that a functionF(x) has a constant second derivative if and only if F(x) has the form
F(x) = ax² +bx + c.
□39 Suppose that F''(x) =G''(x) for all x. Prove that F(x) and G(x) differ by a linear function,
that is, G(x) = F(x) + ax + b for some real numbers a and b.
（全文完）
