# 紧紧把稳航舵，迎向移动大潮 - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2012年05月03日 18:58:35[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：2266
    全球的GDP究竟有多大，难于精确估计。所谓“GDP”就是“GrossDomesticProduact”的字头缩写，即“国民总产值”的意思。因此，全球的GDP的总和究竟有多大，确实难于准确估计，一定是个天文数字吧？
4月30日，《全球移动联盟》公布了一份报告（本文简称“报告”），题为“Stateof
 the Global Mobile Union”，读后有感。该报告的原文简明扼要，我引用全文如下，在必要的地方加以批注，发表感言。
（说明：请务必看完本文最后一段：**What to expect in 2H 2012**，结论太重要了！）
**State of the Global Mobile Union – 2012**
1.Total global mobile revenues
 to hit（达到）$1.5Trillion（万亿美元）in
 2012, over 2% of Global GDP（超过全球GDP的2%！，数字非常可观。注意：全球软件的总收入在3000亿美元左右！由此可见，如今搞软件开发不如搞移动业务。）
– Top10 operators（运营商）control42%
 of the global data mobile revenues
- 
Mobile Services Revenue exceeded（超过）$1
 Trillion for the first time in 2011（注意：去年全球移动服务的收入首次超过1万亿美元。）
– The number of mobile operators with > $1 Billion in yearly data revenues will touch 50 in 2012
- 
Total Global Mobile Data Revenues went past $300 Billion in 2011
– Non-messaging data now owns 53% of the global mobile data revenues
- 
Mobile Operator Profits have more than doubled over the last 10 years.
– However,the wealth is not divided evenly（财富分配不均）.Asia’s
 share has tripled at the expense of Europe whose profit share has declined by 50%
- 
Total Global Subscriptions（全球移动用户）to
 exceed 7 Billion in early 2013 
– China exceeds 1 Billion, India 950 Million. Subscriber growth is in Asia,Revenue growth is in Asia+North America
- 
China and India represent 27% of subscriptions（注意此处的数字）but
 only 12% of the global service revenues 
– US represents only 6% of the subscriptions but 21% of the global servicerevenues, 26% of the data revenues, and 27% of the global CAPEX
- 
MobileDevices are now exceeding traditional computers in unit sales +revenue（移动设备数量及其收益已经超过传统计算机的产量及收益）
– 70%of the device sales in the US are now smartphones. Device Replacementcycle is shrinking（在美国，70%的移动设备是智能手机，设备更新周期正在不断缩短。）
- 
Samsungand Apple now account for 50% of the smartphone unit share and 90%of the profit share（三星、苹果占有50%智能手机的市场份额，而相应的收入却占90%以上。微软靠边站，所谓“移动三巨头”的说法不能成立。）
– Difficultenvironment for other OEMs esp. when ZTE and Huawei are coming strongfrom the bottom. It will be difficult for pure play device OEMs tosurvive
 long-term（对中兴、华为提出忠告。）
- 
Tablets(iPads) has created a new computing paradigm（平板电脑已经建立起一个新的计算范例）thatis
 having a significant impact on commerce, content consumption, anddeveloper investments
– Applewill continue to dominate the segment and iOS will be the leading OSfor the segment. Amazon, ZTE, Huawei, to chip away at the sub-$200tier.（中兴、华为的移动产品已经被边缘化了，产品定价在200美元以下。）
- 
MobileBroadband (4G) is being deployed at a faster rate than previousgenerations, first time data is leading the charge
– Over1.5 Billion broadband connections by 2012
- 
GlobalMobile Apps revenue has completely (and irreversibly) tilted tooff-deck（冠以“满舱”）
– Thedecline is directly proportional to the increase in smartphonepenetration by region
- 
Allmajor markets are consolidating with the top 3 players at 85% of themarket（这种现象很可怕。）
– Regulatorswill have to be more prudent and proactive about managingcompetitiveness and growth（管理当局必须更加谨慎、积极地对待移动竞争与增长的管理，不能放手不管。）
- 
Mobiledata traffic 2x YOY in most markets. Mobile Data will be 95% of theglobal mobile traffic by 2015
– Manycountries are facing spectrum exhaust in the next 2-3 years (incertain markets)
- 
MobileSignaling takes up 2x the resources as Mobile Data Traffic
– Signalingtraffic is growing faster than the data traffic on broadband networks
- 
Connecteddevice segment is growing at the fastest pace in the western markets（接入设备产业在西方国家发展最快。）
– Operatorswill have to quickly adapt their strategies to stay relevant in thissegment
- 
Severalmulti-billion dollar opportunity segments are emerging
– MobileAdvertising, Mobile Commerce, Mobile Wellness, Mobile Games, andMobile Cloud Computing to name a few（注意这些商机。）
- 
MobileEcosystem has become very dynamic and unpredictable
– The5 Platform Amigos – Apple, Google, Amazon, Microsoft, and Facebookdominate though the first two have the real power
- 
MobileOperator Revenue is under pressure from OTT Players
– OTTShare of the Global Mobile Revenues increased to 4%
- 
OTTplayers forcing operators to up their game
– Operatorsare partnering, launching their own OTT apps, increasing tariffs tomanage the margins
- 
IntellectualProperty has become a key component of long-term product strategy
– 21%of all patents granted in US are mobile related. Top 20 control 1/3rdof the overall mobile patent pool
- 
MobilePatent Rankings: US – IBM, Microsoft, Nokia. Europe –Alcatel-Lucent, Nokia, Samsung. Overall – Nokia, Samsung,Alcatel-Lucent
– OEMs– Nokia, Samsung, Sony. Service Providers – AT&T, NTT DoCoMo,Sprint
- 
In3-5 years, with few exceptions, if a company is not doing majorityof its digital business on mobile, it is going to be irrelevant
– Majority(by a good margin) of the consumer interactions with brands will beon mobile
- 
Mobilehas become the single most important digital channel for engagingconsumers and it shows
– Inthe US, mobile revenues were > all Ecommerce And > Music, ISP,Hollywood, and Cable revenues combined
- 
Wehave entered the mobile 3.0 era where “data” is all that mattersand it disrupts the value chains
– Datawill drive majority of the network growth, Contextual data will drivemajority of the VAS growth
- 
Therewill be more changes in the next 10 years than in the previous 100
– Thevalue chains will keep disrupting every 12-18 months by the newplayers and business models. Several verticals are already gettingredefined e.g.
 retail, health, education, etc.
**TheBig Picture**
Theglobal mobile industry is the most vibrant and fastest growingindustry. We expect the total revenue in the industry to touchapproximately $1.5
 Trillion in 2012 with mobile data representing 28%of the mix. Mobile data services revenue stood at 33%. Global MobileData revenues eclipsed $300 Billion for the first time in 2011. It isalso the first year in which non-messaging data revenues will make upthe
 majority of the overall global data revenues at 53%.
Bythe end of 2011, the global subscriptions exceeded 6 Billion. Thefirst 1 billion took over 20 years and this last one took only 15months. The primary
 growth drivers are India and China which arecumulatively adding 75M new subs every quarter. China became thefirst country to eclipse the 1 billion mark in March 2012. India islikely to arrive at the milestone by early 2013.
Smartphonesare driving tremendous growth around the globe. Amongst the majormarkets, US leads with 69% sales. The global figure stands atapproximately
 32%. Some operators expect 90-95% of their device salesto be smartphones in 2012. In terms of the actual smartphonepenetration, we expect the US market to eclipse the 50% mark in 2012.
Chinaleads in the number of subs but US dominates in both total and datarevenue. A number of emerging nations are now in top 10 – Brazil,India, Russia,
 Indonesia, Pakistan, Mexico while once dominant –Korea, UK, Italy, Germany have dropped off or slipped in rankings.
**GlobalMobile Data Growth**
Japancontinues to be the leader in mobile data with NTT DoCoMo, KDDI, andSoftbank Japan ahead of the pack in terms of mobile data revenue anddata
 as a % of total ARPU. Country average is now at 60%.
Next,Australia and the US have made good inroads in the last two years. Infact, if we look at the overall data revenue, US is much furtherahead than
 any other nation due to the size of the market. 
WhileIndia has the highest subscriber growth rate in the world right now,the revenue generating opportunity remain down right anemic comparedto other
 major markets with average dropping down to $2.50 in overallARPU. Even with significant subscriber base, there is going to be ageneral lack of opportunity in the market for the next couple ofyears relative to other markets.
**Devices– Changing Landscape**
Applehas had the tablet space to itself. Thus far the response from thecompetitors has been tepid esp. on the pricing dimension. Apple hashad such
 a mastery over the supply-chain and months ahead of thecompetition that by the time they figure out details, Apple alreadylocks up the pricing advantage for the cycle. OEMs try to catch-up onthe features but can’t do on the margins. OEMs can grow the pie bybringing
 products at a better price points that helps attractdifferent demographics to the mix. Microsoft can make good inroadsinto the space with its Win8 tablet release in 2012 but it will beagain in a catch-up mode as the iOS ecosystem will be even morerobust by
 then. The cheaper Android tablets will do well in themarket. As expected, tablets will pretty much eliminate the need fornetbooks and are starting to eat into the desktop/laptop revenue.
Appleand Samsung are strong on the top. Huawei and ZTE are coming upstrong from the bottom. The middle tier players will have a toughtime going forward.
Itwill be difficult for pureplay device OEMs to survive long-term.
Nokiaand RIM are under severe market scrutiny as investors and developersleave in droves. Lack of product planning and execution has lefttheir market
 share in disarray. Nokia’s valuation has been cut intohalf. Nokia’s release of N9 shows the engineering and creativedesign depth but a lot is riding on the first generation of NokiaWindows Phones (Lumia). While the market hasn’t shown much appetitefor Windows
 phone thus far, a good family of devices might be able toslow the loss trajectory and position the combined team for theup-for-grabs 3rd spot in the ecosystem. Given that thecomputing is shifting to mobile devices, we can expect some of theweaker
 desktop/laptop players will exit the industry.
Majorityof the tablet use is in the WiFi mode because the primary use case isindoors and WiFi gives a better (and cheaper) user experience.However,
 of the users who use cellular, the churn is low. Onceoperators start to roll out user-friendly family data plans acrossmultiple devices, we can expect the cellular activation go higher(e.g. Rogers, Vodafone Spain) but will still be dominated by WiFioverall.
**MobileVAS and OTT – The Big Picture**
• Thetraditional operator revenue streams of
– Voice– declining and under threat from VoIP
– Messaging– flattening/declining and under threat from IP messaging
– Access– rising but margins are shrinking fast
– VAS– declining in proportion to the growth of smartphones
• Operatorsare fighting back with
– Voice– launching their own VoIP apps e.g. Bobsled from T-Mobile,partnering with VoIP players e.g. Skype integration, charging forVoIP apps e.g.
 TeliaSonera €6/month
– Messaging– launching their own IP messaging apps e.g. Huddle from AT&T,partnering with IP messaging players e.g. Whatsapp partnership
– Access– Tiering
– VAS– launch their own VAS apps and industry vertical apps and services
**ManagingMobile Data Traffic and Profits**
Asa result of the data tsunami, there are two types of opportunitiesthat are being created, one that take advantage of the data beinggenerated in
 a way that enhances the user experience and providesvalue and the other in technologies that help manage the traffic datathat will continue to grow exponentially.
Tobe able to stay ahead of the demand, significant planning needs to goin to deal with the bits and bytes that are already exploding. Newtechnical
 and business solutions will be needed to manage the growthand profit from the services. Relying on only one solution won’t bean effective strategy to manage rising data demand. A holisticapproach to managing data traffic is needed and our analysis showsthat
 the cost structure can be reduced by more than half if a suiteof solutions are deployed vs. a single dimensional approach and thusbringing the hockey stick curves of data cost more in line with therevenues and thus preserving the margins.
Thedecision making process within the operator organizations will needto be streamlined as well. Operators should also consider creating asenior post
 which focuses on both the cost side and the solution sideso they can devise and institute a sustainable long-term policy andkeep the margins healthy.
**MobileIntellectual Property**
• TheIP tussles are playing out as expected
• Playerswith strong IP portfolios will be able to command better negotiatingpositions, new revenue streams, competitive positioning over thelong-term
• Onaverage mobile companies file patents 1.7 times more in the US vs.Europe
• MobilePatent Leaders in US: IBM, Microsoft, Nokia
• MobilePatent Leaders in Europe: Alcatel-Lucent, Nokia, Samsung
• MobilePatent Leaders in Infrastructure: Samsung, Alcatel-Lucent, Ericsson
• MobilePatent Leaders in Devices: Nokia, Samsung, Sony
• MobilePatent Leaders in Service Providers: AT&T, NTT DoCoMo, Sprint
• Top20 control 1/3rd of the total mobile communications patentpool
**MobileCompetitive Dynamics**
TheRule of Three is evident in all major markets. While the percentagemarket share might vary, on an average, the top 3 control 93% of themarket in
 an given nation. It doesn’t matter if the market isdefined by “controlled regulation” like in China, Korea, andJapan or if it is “open market” driven in markets such as the US,UK, and India. Eventually, only top 3 operators control the majorityof the market.
 There are niches that others occupy but they arelargely irrelevant to the overall structure and functioning of themobile market.
Marketssuch as US and India experienced similar competitive environment intheir hyper-growth phase. For the US, this phase was in thenineties-mid-2000s
 while India has been experiencing the similarenvironment in the last 3-4 years. In both cases, at the start thereare 5-6 players with no more than 25% market share but higher than10% of the mix but gradually the market forces enable consolidation.Over a period
 of 18 years, US is settling into a “top 3” operatormarket. India’s brutal price wars are going to trigger theconsolidation in the next 12-24 months and will eventually settleinto a structure similar to other markets.
Thecompetitive equilibrium point in the mobile industry seems to whenthe market shares of the top 3 are 46%:29%:18% respectively with theremaining
 7% being allocated to the niche operators. To achieve somesemblance of equilibrium in the market the top operator shouldn’thave more than 50% of the market share and the number three playershouldn’t have less than 20%. This helps create enough balance inthe
 market to derive maximum value for the consumer.
Mobileoperators will face some hard choices in developing and protectingthe role they want to play in a given region and the ecosystemat-large. The
 strategy they choose will have a direct impact on theexpected EBITDA margins, investment required over the long-haul, howinvestors view them, and on the competitive landscape of the country.Given, the fast pace of globalization, new rules and trends mightemerge
 over the course of this decade that further define“communications” and “computing” as we know.
**KeyIndustry Micro-Milestones**
- 
Applecaptures 70% of mobile device profits – defies gravity,obliterates competition
- 
Applemobile appstore downloads exceed 25 Billion, 100 Million on Mac –can you spell domination
- 
Samsungends Nokia’s 14 year reign as the device king – brutal execution
- 
Android300M activations – Juggernaut
- 
Paypaldoes $7B in mobile transaction volume
- 
Squaredoes $5B in commerce transaction volume
- 
Google> $5B in mobile revenues
- 
Microsoftrevenues from Android > Windows Mobile
- 
Pandora’s70% usage is on mobile, Twitter’s 60% of the usage is on mobile –heading towards a mobile-dominant world
- 
FacebookInstagram Acquisition $1B – Mobile only acquisition to beef upmobile strategy
- 
AngryBirds approaches a billion downloads
- 
ESPNdoes 3.1 billion minutes on mobile in 3/12 – Mobile is where theaction is
- 
Skypetraffic over 150 billion minutes – OTT pressure
- 
KPNmessaging volumes decline 15% YOY – OTT pressure
- 
MobileSecurity threats grow 7x in last two years, Android threats up 3000%– Mobile IS IT
- 
CiscoBYOD ratio – 70% (up 52% in 2011) - BYOD is creating newopportunities for vendors
- 
USdata traffic over 130 quadrillion bytes/month in 2011 – Datatraffic 2X YOY, welcome to the yottabyte era
- 
Fandangosells quarter of its ticket on mobile – commerce is happening
- 
Expediadoes > $1B in mobile commerce – see above
- 
MicrosoftNokia Multi-Billion partnership – It takes two to tango
- 
Lightsquaredfails – Keep your friends close, enemies closer
- 
GoogleMotorola $12.5B – IP becomes key to strategy
- 
NortelPatent acquisition $4.5B – IP becomes key to strategy
- 
AT&T/T-MobileFailure – DOJ/FCC put down the gavel
- 
40%of Kenya’s GDP comes from mobile money – impact of mobile ispervasive
- 
MillennialMedia IPO at $2B – first public market validation of the mobileadvertising space
- 
HPgives up on Palm – Competition forces Corporate Schizophrenia
**Whatto expect in 2H 2012**
• MoreTiering, faster pace of change of plans. More options, family dataplans
• Costreduction is as important as revenue generation. More players willalign their value-chains and cost structures
• FacebookIPO is probably going to be the single biggest event in thetechnology industry in the next few months.
• Radioswill start connecting the digital world with the physical world withsignificant disruption opportunity
• MobilePayment Networks will remain intact for the near future as theecosystem largely focuses on building value on top of the existingexchange platforms
• Theintersection of Social, Location, Identity, and Gaming is creatingnew opportunities
• Withconnectivity becoming pervasive, mobile will fundamentally start toalter the legacy infrastructure – retail, health, education,energy, computing,
 travel, entertainment
• Significanttablet adoption in the enterprise directly impacting the traditionalcomputer manufacturers
• BothHTML5 and Apps will continue to grow, the relevancy to any givenapplication will depend on the reach and economics requirements.HTML5 is not
 going to replace Apps.
• Mobiledata growth will double again in 2012. Significant opportunities inmanaged and understanding of mobile data growth
• Regulatorswill need to evolve to keep up with the trend to keep their nationglobally competitive
• MoreIP scuffles before licensing settlements
• Consolidationof weaker players, more global M&A
• Significantprogress in emerging areas like mHealth, mPayments will come from thedeveloping world while the western countries get mired in regulatoryand
 legacy mess
• Severalplayers face challenging times ahead and 2012 will be critical intheir turn around sojourn.
Yourfeedback is always welcome.
ChetanSharma
Wewill be keeping a close eye on the trends in the wireless data sectorin
 our [blog](http://www.chetansharma.com/blog), [twitterfeeds](http://www.twitter.com/chetansharma), [futureresearch reports](http://www.chetansharma.com/research.htm), and[articles](http://www.chetansharma.com/media.htm).The next US Wireless Data Market update will be released in May 2012.The next Global Wireless Data
 Market update will be issued in Apr2012.
Disclaimer:Some of the companies mentioned in this paper are our[clients](http://www.chetansharma.com/clients.htm).
## 抱歉，由于内容太多，没有批注完毕。
袁萌5月3日
