# 超乘积构造方法 - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2019年01月11日 23:06:16[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：863
进入本世纪，2010年6月55日，数学家J.Keisler发表论文，对模型论基础构造方法超乘积（Ultraproducts）的历史发展进行综述，并且列出了54篇相关论文，很有参考价值。
简而言之，所谓“超乘积”∏ Ai（i是指标集合U的元素，U一般是可数无限结合）。
利用不同的滤子，结合给定的超乘积，可以构造出各种数学模型，比如：超实数系统。
有兴趣的读者可参阅本文附件。
袁萌  陈启清  元月11日
附件：以下是J.Keisler于2010年6月5日，发表的“超乘积构造方法”的原文：
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION
H. JEROME KEISLER
Abstract. This is a brief survey of the ultraproduct construction, which is meant to provide background material for the readers of this volume.
1. Introduction
The ultraproduct construction is a uniform method of building models of ﬁrst order theories which has applications in many areas of mathematics. It is attractive because it is algebraic in nature, but preserves all properties expressible in ﬁrst order logic. The idea goes back to the construction of nonstandard models of arithmetic by Skolem [51] in 1934. In 1948, Hewitt [16] studied ultraproducts of ﬁelds. For ﬁrst order structures in general, the ultraproduct construction was deﬁned by L o´s [37] in 1955. The subject developed rapidly beginning in 1958 with a series of abstracts by Frayne, Morel, Scott, and Tarski, which led to the 1962 paper [14]. Other early papers are [31] by Kochen, and [18] by the author. The groundwork for the application of ultraproducts to mathematics was laid in the late 1950’s through the 1960’s. The purpose of this article is to give a survey of the classical results on ultraproducts of ﬁrst order structures in order to provide some background for the papers in this volume. Over the years, many generalizations of the ultraproduct construction, as well as applications of ultraproducts to non-ﬁrst order structures, have appeared in the literature. To keep this paper of reasonable length, we will not include such generalizations in this survey. For earlier surveys of ultraproducts see [7], [12], [24]. For much more about ultraproducts see the books [9], [10], [49], and [54]. We assume familiarity with a few basic concepts from model theory. For the convenience of the reader we give a crash course here. The cardinality of a set X is denoted by |X|. The cardinality of N is denoted by ω. The set of all subsets of a set I is denoted by P(I), and the set of ﬁnite subsets of I by Pω(I). Given mappings f : X → Y and g : Y → Z, the composition g ◦ f : X → Z is the mapping x 7→ g(f(x)). A ﬁrst order vocabulary L consists of a set of ﬁnitary relation symbols, function symbols, and constant symbols. We use A,B,... to denote L-structures with universe sets A,B,.... By the cardinality of A we mean the cardinality of its universe set A. The notationA|= φ(a1,...,an) means that the formula φ(x1,...,xn) is true in A when each xi is interpreted by the corresponding ai. The notation h : A→B means that h is a homomorphism ofAintoB, that is, h maps A into B and each atomic formula which is true for a tuple inAis true for the h-image of the tuple in B. The notation h : A⊆B means that h is an (isomorphic) embedding ofAintoB, that is, h maps A into B and each quantiﬁer-free formula of
Date: June 1, 2010. 2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 03C20, Secondary 03H05, 54D80 . 1
（全文参阅“无穷小微积分”网站）
2 H. JEROME KEISLER L which is true for a tuple in A is true for the h-image of the tuple in B. h : A∼ = Bmeans that h is an isomorphism from A onto B, and A∼ = B means that A and Bare isomorphic. The set of all sentences true in Ais called the complete theory of A. A and B are called elementarily equivalent, in symbols A≡B, if they have the same complete theory. The notation h : A≺B means that h is an elementary embedding from A into B, that is, h maps A into B and each formula of L which is true for a tuple in A is true for the h-image of the tuple in B. Clearly, h : A≺B implies that A≡B. We say that B is an elementary extension of A and write A≺B if A ⊆ B and the identity map is an elementary embedding of A into B. It is easy to see that if h : A≺B, then B is isomorphic to some elementary extension of A.A fundamental result that is used very often in model theory is the compactness theorem, which says that if every ﬁnite subset of a set T of sentences has a model, then T has a model. One application of compactness is the construction of extremely rich models called saturated models. An L-structure A is said to be κsaturated if every set of ﬁrst order formulas with fewer than κ parameters from A which is ﬁnitely satisﬁed inAis satisﬁed inA. Ais saturated if it is|A|-saturated. Morley and Vaught [39] proved that any two elementarily equivalent saturated structures of the same cardinality are isomorphic, that each inﬁnite structure A has a saturated elementary extension in each inaccessible cardinal κ ≥ |A|+|L|, and has a κ+-saturated elementary extension of cardinality 2κ whenever 2κ ≥|A| and κ ≥|L|. Given two vocabularies L1 ⊆ L2, the reduct of an L2-structure A2 to L1 is theL 1-structureA1 obtained by forgetting the interpretation of each symbol of L2\L1.An expansion of an L1-structure A1 to L2 is an L2-structure formed by adding interpretations of the symbols of L2 \L1, that is, an L2-structure whose reduct to L1 is A1. 2. Ultraproducts and ultrapowers
We begin with the deﬁnition of an ultraﬁlter over an index set I. An ultraﬁlter over I can be deﬁned as the collection of all sets of measure 1 with respect to a ﬁnitely additive measure µ : P(I) →{0,1}. Here is an equivalent deﬁnition in more primitive terms.
Deﬁnition 2.1. Let I be a non-empty set. A proper ﬁlter U over I is a set of subsets of I such that: (i) U is closed under supersets; if X ∈ U and X ⊆ Y ⊆ I then Y ∈ U. (ii) U is closed under ﬁnite intersections; if X ∈ U and Y ∈ U then X ∩Y ∈ U. (iii) I ∈ U but ∅ / ∈ U.An ultraﬁlter over I is a proper ﬁlter U over I such that: (iv) For each X ⊆ I, exactly one of the sets X,I \X belongs to U. Theorem 2.2. (Tarski [53]) Every proper ﬁlter over a set I can be extended to an ultraﬁlter over I.
For an inﬁnite set I, an important example of a proper ﬁlter over I is the Fr´echet ﬁlter, which is the set of all coﬁnite (complements of ﬁnite) subsets of I. An ultraﬁlter that contains the Fr´echet ﬁlter is called a free ultraﬁlter. By Theorem 2.2, the Fr´echet ﬁlter can be extended to an ultraﬁlter over I, so free ultraﬁlters over I exist.
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION 3
The only ultraﬁlters over I which are not free are the principal ultraﬁlters, which are of the form U = {X ⊆ I : i0 ∈ X} for some i0 ∈ I. For a set I of ﬁnite cardinality n, every ultraﬁlter over I is principal, and thus there are only n ultraﬁlters over I. The following result of Posp´ıˇsil [41] shows that there are as many ultraﬁlters over an inﬁnite set I as there are sets of subsets of I.
Theorem 2.3. For each set I of inﬁnite cardinality κ, the set of ultraﬁlters over I has cardinality 22κ.
We now deﬁne the ultraproduct operation on sets. Let U be an ultraﬁlter over I, and for each i ∈ I let Ai be a nonempty set. The ultraproduct∏U Ai is obtained by ﬁrst taking the cartesian product Πi∈IAi and then identifying two elements which are equal for U-almost all i ∈ I. Here is the formal deﬁnition. Deﬁnition 2.4. Let U be an ultraﬁlter over I. Two elements f,g of the cartesian product∏i∈I Ai are said to be U-equivalent, in symbols f =U g, if the set {i : f(i) = g(i)}belongs to U. The U-equivalence class of f is the set fU = {g : f =U g}. The ultraproduct∏U Ai is deﬁned as the set of U-equivalence classes ∏ U Ai = {fU : f ∈∏ i∈I Ai}. In the above deﬁnition, it is easily checked that =U is an equivalence relation on∏ i∈I Ai. Given a nonempty set A, the ultrapower of A modulo U is the deﬁned as the ultraproduct∏U A =∏U Ai where Ai = A for each i ∈ I. The natural embedding is the mapping d : A →∏U A such that d(a) is the U-equivalence class of the constant function with value a. It is easily seen that d is injective. We now introduce the ultraproduct operation on ﬁrst order structures. For each i ∈ I, let Ai be an L-structure with universe set Ai. Brieﬂy, the ultraproduct ∏U Ai is the unique L-structure with universe∏U Ai such that each basic formula holds in the ultraproduct if and only if it holds in Ai for U-almost all i. Here is the formal deﬁnition. Deﬁnition 2.5. Given an ultraﬁlter U over I and L-structures Ai,i ∈ I, the ultraproduct∏U Ai is the unique L-structure B such that: • The universe of B is the set B =∏U Ai. • For each atomic formula φ(x1,...,xk) which has at most one symbol from the vocabulary L, and each f1,...,fk ∈∏i∈I Ai, B|= φ(f1U,...,fkU) iﬀ {i : A|= φ(f1(i),...,fk(i))}∈ U. Using the properties of ultraﬁlters, one can check that there is a unique Lstructure B with the above properties, so the ultraproduct is well-deﬁned. The details are tedious but routine. As with sets, the ultrapower of an L-structure A modulo U is deﬁned as the ultraproduct∏U A =∏U Ai where Ai = A for each i ∈ I. 3. The theorem of L o´ s
We now prove the fundamental theorem of L o´s, which makes ultraproducts useful in model theory. It shows that a formula holds in an ultraproduct∏U Ai if and only if it holds in Ai for U-almost all i.
4 H. JEROME KEISLER
Theorem 3.1. (L o´s [37]) Let U be an ultraﬁlter over I, and letAi be an L-structure for each i ∈ I. Then for each formula φ(x1,...,xn) of L and each f1,...,fn ∈ ∏i∈I Ai, we have ∏ U Ai |= φ(f1U,...,fnU) iﬀ {i : Ai |= φ(f1(i),...,fn(i))}∈ U. Proof. We argue by induction on the complexity of φ. The deﬁnition of ultraproduct gives the result when φ is an atomic formula of the form F(x1,...,xn) = y. An induction on the complexity of terms gives the result for atomic formulas of the form t(x1,...,xn) = y, and then the deﬁnition of ultraproduct gives the result for arbitrary atomic formulas of L. The steps for logical connectives are easy. To complete the proof we give the step for existential quantiﬁers. Suppose the result holds for the formula φ(f1U,...,fnU,gU) where f1,...,fn,g ∈∏i∈I Ai. We prove the result for the formula ∃y φ(f1U,...,fnU,y). Using the inductive hypothesis and the fact that U is closed under supersets, we see that the following are equivalent: ∏ U Ai |= ∃y φ(f1U,...,fnU,y) (∃g)∏ U Ai |= φ(f1U,...,fnU,gU) (∃g){i : Ai |= φ(f1(i),...,fn(i),g(i))}∈ U {i : Ai |= ∃y φ(f1(i),...,fn(i),y)}∈ U. This completes the induction.
Corollary 3.2. For each set of sentences T in L, every ultraproduct of models of T is a model of T. Corollary 3.3. For each L-structure A and ultraﬁlter U over I, d : A ≺∏U A. If A is ﬁnite, d : A∼ =∏U A. In applications, it is often convenient to rename the elements of an ultrapower. We say that an isomorphic embedding h : A→B is an ultrapower embedding if h = j ◦d for some isomorphism j :∏U A∼ = B. The natural embedding d : A→∏ U A is an ultrapower embedding. We say that B is an ultrapower extensionof A if A ⊆ B and the identity map ι : A→B is an ultrapower embedding. Note that every ultrapower embedding is an elementary embedding, every ultrapower extension is an elementary extension, and every ultrapower of A is isomorphic to an ultrapower extension of A.
4. Some consequences of L o´s’ Theorem
An important property of the ultraproduct construction is that it behaves well when new symbols are added to the vocabulary. The following simple observation is quite powerful when combined with L o´s’ Theorem. Proposition 4.1. (Expansion Property) Suppose L1 ⊆ L2, and for each i ∈ I, Ai is an L1-structure and Bi is an expansion of Ai to L2. Then for every ultraﬁlter U over I,∏U Bi is an expansion of∏U Ai.
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION 5 Given an ultraﬁlter U over a set I and a mapping h : A → B, deﬁne∏U h to be the mapping fU 7→ (h ◦ f)U from∏U A into∏U B. The next result is a consequence of the Expansion Property and L o´s’ Theorem. Proposition 4.2. Let U be an ultraﬁlter over I. The mapping h 7→∏U h is a functor on the category of all homomorphisms h : A→B between L-structures. If h : A→B then∏U h :∏U A→∏U B. If h is surjective, then so is∏U h. If h is an isomorphic embedding, then so is∏U h. If h is an elementary embedding, then so is∏U h. The initial interest in ultraproducts in the late 1950’s was sparked by the discovery of a proof of the Compactness Theorem for ﬁrst order logic via ultraproducts (see [14]). This proof was attractive because it gave a direct algebraic construction of the required model.
Theorem 4.3. (Ultraproduct Compactness) Let S be an inﬁnite set of sentences of L and let I be the set of all ﬁnite subsets of S. For each i ∈ I let Ai be a model of i. Then there is an ultraﬁlter U over I such that the ultraproduct∏U Ai is a model of S. Proof. For each i ∈ I, let Xi be the set of all j ∈ I such that i ⊆ j. Let F be the set of all X ⊆ I such that X ⊇ Xi for some i ∈ I. Note that i ∈ Xi, and Xi∪j = Xi ∩Xj. It follows that F is a proper ﬁlter over I. By Theorem 2.2, F can be extended to an ultraﬁlter U over I. For each φ ∈ S and j ∈ X{φ}, Aj is a model of φ. Moreover, X{φ} ∈ U. Therefore by L o´s’ Theorem,∏U Ai is a model of φ. Hence∏U Ai is a model of S as required.
 The compactness theorem is an easy corollary of this result. For this reason, the ultraproduct construction can be used as a substitute for the compactness theorem with an algebraic ﬂavor. Another important property of ultraproducts is that an ultraproduct of ultraproducts is isomorphic to a single ultraproduct. This property was also proved in [14] by applying L o´s’ Theorem. To avoid complicated notation, we will state the result only for ultrapowers. Deﬁnition 4.4. Let U,V be ultraﬁlters over sets I,J. The product U ×V is the set U ×V = {Y ⊆ I ×J : {j ∈ J : {i ∈ I : 〈i,j〉∈ Y}∈ U}∈ V}. The following result shows that the product of two ultraﬁlters produces an ultrapower of an ultrapower.
Proposition 4.5. (See [14]) Let U be an ultraﬁlter over I and V be an ultraﬁlter over J, and let A be any L-structure. Then: (i) U ×V is an ultraﬁlter over I ×J. (ii)∏U×V A∼ =∏V (∏U A). (iii) Each of the ultrapowers ∏U A and ∏V A is elementarily embeddable in∏ U×V A. The order in the product U ×V matters. See [9], Exercise 6.1.19, for examples where∏U×V A is not isomorphic to∏V×U A.
6 H. JEROME KEISLER
5. Uniform and countably incomplete ultrafilters
From now on, we will conﬁne our attention to ultraﬁlters which are uniform and countably incomplete. In this section we explain why. Deﬁnition 5.1. An ultraﬁlter U over I is uniform if every X ∈ U has cardinality |X| = |I|. If I is a singleton I = {i0}, then {I} is a uniform ultraﬁlter over I. But if I is a ﬁnite set of cardinality |I| > 1, then every ultraﬁlter over I is principal, so there is no uniform ultraﬁlter over I. If I is inﬁnite, then the set F = {X ⊆ I : |I \X| < |I|} of subsets with small complements is a proper ﬁlter over I, and an ultraﬁlter U over I is uniform if and only if U contains F. By Theorem 2.2, F can be extended to an ultraﬁlter over I, so there exist uniform ultraﬁlters over I. For ultraproducts, we can always replace a non-uniform ultraﬁlter by a uniform ultraﬁlter. Suppose U is a non-uniform ultraﬁlter over I, and let J be an element of U of minimum cardinality. Then the set V = U ∩P(J) is a uniform ultraﬁlter over J, and every ultraproduct∏U Ai is isomorphic to the ultraproduct∏V Aj by the mapping gU 7→ (g  J)V . Deﬁnition 5.2. An ultraﬁlter U is countably complete if U is closed under countable intersections. U is countably incomplete if U has a countable subset V such that∩V = ∅. It is an easy exercise to show that an ultraﬁlter U is countably incomplete if and only if it is not countably complete. Every principal ultraﬁlter is countably complete. However, the hypothesis that there exists a non-principal countably complete ultraﬁlter is a very strong axiom of inﬁnity that is not provable from ZFC. The ﬁrst cardinal κ such that there is a nonprincipal countably complete ultraﬁlter over a set of cardinality κ is called the ﬁrst measurable cardinal. This cardinal, if it exists, is exceedingly large (for example, κ must be the κ-th inaccessible cardinal, and even the κ-th Ramsey cardinal; see [29]). Countably complete ultraproducts satisfy an analogue of L o´s’ Theorem for the inﬁnitary logic with conjunctions and quantiﬁers of length < κ (see [19]). It follows that when U is a countably complete ultraﬁlter and the cardinality of A is less than the ﬁrst measurable cardinal, the ultrapower∏U A is trivial, that is, d : A ∼ = ∏U A. For this reason, the study of countably complete ultrapowers belongs to the theory of large cardinals. It is an large and active area of research, but is outside the scope of this article. We conclude this section with some results which hold for all countably incomplete ultraﬁlters. The following easy result shows that countably incomplete ultrapowers of inﬁnite structures are always non-trivial. Proposition 5.3. Let U be a countably incomplete ultraﬁlter over I and let A be inﬁnite. Then d maps A properly into the ultrapower∏U A, and hence∏U A is isomorphic to a proper elementary extension of A. Here are some results about cardinalities of ultraproducts.
Theorem 5.4. (Frayne, Morel and Scott [14]) Let U be a countably incomplete ultraﬁlter. Then∏U Ai is either ﬁnite or of cardinality ≥ 2ω. Thus an ultraproduct ∏U Ai is never countably inﬁnite.
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION 7
The following improvement was given in Keisler [21] for ultraproducts of inﬁnite sets, and in Shelah [46] for ultraproducts of ﬁnite sets. Theorem 5.5. Let U be a countably incomplete ultraproduct. If∏I Ai is inﬁnite, then |∏U A| = |∏U A|ω. Here is a property of countably incomplete ultraproducts which is used in many applications, such as the Loeb measure in probability theory, and the nonstandard hull of a Banach space.
Theorem 5.6. (Keisler [18]). Suppose L is countable and U is a countably incomplete ultraﬁlter over I. Then every ultraproduct∏U Ai is ω1-saturated. 6. Complete embeddings
One advantage of ultrapowers is that they always produce complete embeddings in the following sense. Deﬁnition 6.1. We say that mapping h : A→B is a complete embedding of A into B if for every expansion of A′ of A there is an expansion B′ of B such that h : A′ ≺B′. B is a complete extension of A if A ⊆ B and the identity mapping ι : A → B is a complete embedding. Note that every complete embedding is an elementary embedding. By Proposition 4.1, the natural embedding d : A→∏U A is a complete embedding, and hence every ultrapower embedding is a complete embedding. The converse of this fact is false—there are complete embeddings which are not ultrapower embeddings (see [9], Exercise 6.4.6). However, the next result shows that each complete embedding is locally an ultrapower embedding. Theorem 6.2. Suppose h : A→B is a complete embedding. Then for each ﬁnite subset S of B there is a C ≺ B such that S ⊆ C and h : A → C is an ultrapower embedding. This is a consequence of a stronger result in [20], which states that h : A→B is a complete embedding if and only if it is a limit ultrapower embedding (we will not deﬁne limit ultrapowers here, but mention only that they are generalizations of ultrapowers which share many of their properties). The following two results do not mention ultrapowers but are proved using ultrapowers.
Theorem 6.3. (Rabin [43] and Keisler [20]; see also [9]) Suppose κ is inﬁnite and less than the ﬁrst measurable cardinal. Then the following are equivalent (i) κ = κω. (ii) Every structure of cardinality κ (with any number of relations) has a proper elementary extension of cardinality κ. (iii) Every structure of cardinality κ has a proper complete extension of cardinality κ.
The next result improves the classical upward L¨owenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem when the vocabulary L is large.
Theorem 6.4. ([9], Corollary 6.5.12) Suppose κ is inﬁnite and less than the ﬁrst measurable cardinal. Then every structure of cardinality κ (with any number of relations) has an elementary extension of cardinality λ if and only if λ ≥ κω.
8 H. JEROME KEISLER
7. Nonstandard universes
In applications of the ultrapower, one often picks an ultraﬁlter U and simultaneously takes the ultrapower of everything in sight modulo U. An eﬃcient way to do this is to begin with a superstructure and use the ultrapower to build a nonstandard universe. We will brieﬂy sketch how this is done, and then point out a connection between nonstandard universes and complete embeddings. For more details, see [9], or Chapter 15 of [28]. Ultrapowers are also used to construct models of various nonstandard set theories, such as Nelson’s internal set theory and Hrbaˇcek set theory, showing that they are conservative over ZFC (see [33] for a full treatment and references). Given a set X, the n-th cumulative power set of X is deﬁned recursively by V0(X) = X, Vn+1(X) = Vn(X)∪P(Vn(X)). The superstructure over X is the union of the cumulative power sets and is denoted by V (X),
V (X) =
∞ ∪ n=0
Vn(X).
The superstructure V (X) has a membership relation ∈ between elements of Vn(X) and Vn+1(X), n = 0,1,2,.... We treat the elements of X as atoms, and always assume that ∅ / ∈ X and that no x ∈ X contains any elements of V (X). We thenconsider the structure V(X) = 〈V (X),∈〉 whose vocabulary has the single binaryrelation ∈. Deﬁnition 7.1. A function f : I → V (X) is called bounded if f : I → Vn(X) for some n, so∪n(Vn(X))I is the set of all bounded functions. Given an ultraﬁlter U over I, the bounded ultrapower∏b U V(X) ofV(X) modulo U is the substructureof the ordinary ultrapower ∏U V(X) whose universe is the setb ∏ U V (X) = {gU : g ∈∪ n (Vn(X))I} of U-equivalence classes of bounded functions. The interpretation of ∈ in∏b U V(X)is denoted by ∈U. A bounded quantiﬁer formula is a ﬁrst order formula in which each quantiﬁer has the form (∀u ∈ v) or (∃u ∈ v). Deﬁnition 7.2. A nonstandard universe is a triple (V (X),V (∗X),∗) such that: • V (X) and V (∗X) are superstructures, • ∗ : V (X) → V (∗X), • N⊆ X, • ∗ maps N properly into ∗N, and • (Transfer Principle) For each bounded quantiﬁer formula φ(v1,...,vk) and a1,...,ak ∈ V (X), V(X) |= φ(a1,...,ak) if and only if V(∗X) |= φ(∗a1,...,∗ak). The following basic result converts a bounded ultrapower of a superstructure into a nonstandard universe in a canonical way. The advantage of doing this is that it replaces the relation ∈U by the ordinary membership relation ∈. The Transfer Principle is proved using L o´s’ Theorem.
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION 9
Theorem 7.3. (Mostowski Collapse) For each superstructure V(X) and countably incomplete ultraﬁlter U, there is a unique nonstandard universe (V (X),V (∗X),∗) and mapping h :∏b U V(X) →V(∗X) such that: • ∗X =∏U X, and h(gU) = gU for each gU ∈∏U X, and • For each gU ∈∏b U V (X)\∏U X, h(gU) = {h(fU) : fU ∈U gU}. We now observe that each nonstandard universe harbors a whole tower of complete embeddings. Proposition 7.4. Let (V (X),V (∗X),∗) be a nonstandard universe. For each n, let Vn(X) = 〈Vn(X) ∈〉 and ∗(Vn(X)) = 〈∗(Vn(X)),∈〉. Then ∗ : Vn(X) → ∗(Vn(X)) is a complete embedding. Proof. Since Vn(X) is an element of V (X)\X, ∗(Vn(X)) is an element of V (∗X)\ ∗X. Therefore ∗(Vn(X)) is also a subset of V (∗X). We have ∗ : Vn(X) ≺∗(Vn(X)) because∗preserves bounded formulas inV(X). But any ﬁnitary function or relation on Vn(X) is an element of Vm(X) for some m, and we also have ∗ : Vm(X) ≺ ∗(Vm(X)). This shows that ∗ : Vn(X) →∗(Vn(X)) is a complete embedding.
 Combining this with Theorem 6.2, we see that every nonstandard universe is locally an ultrapower embedding. Corollary 7.5. Let (V (X),V (∗X),∗) be a nonstandard universe. For each n and each ﬁnite set S ⊆ ∗(Vn(X)) there is a C ≺ Vn(∗X) such that S ⊆ C and ∗ : Vn(X) →C is an ultrapower embedding. Benci constructed a nonstandard universe with the nice property that ∗X = X, so that only one superstructure in needed instead of two. Theorem 7.6. (Benci [3]) For each set X such that N⊆ X and |X|ω = |X|, there is a nonstandard universe (V (X),V (X),∗). The ﬁrst step in constructing (V (X),V (X),∗) is to take a free ultraﬁlter U over N and form the bounded ultrapower∏b U V(X). Then choose a bijection j from∏ U X onto X, and for x ∈ X deﬁne ∗x = j(d(x)). Finally, extend ∗ to a mapping from V (X) into itself using the Mostowski collapse.
8. The Rudin-Keisler ordering
The ultrapower construction was the motivation for the so-called Rudin-Keisler ordering (introduced by M.E. Rudin [44] and the author [25]). It is a pre-ordering on the class of all ultraﬁlters. Heuristically, higher ultraﬁlters in the ordering produce larger ultrapowers with respect to elementary embeddings. This ordering has been extensively studied in the literature, particulary for ultraﬁlters over N, because it has a rich structure and leads to many attractive problems. The minimal ultraﬁlters over N in this ordering ordering oﬀer promising possibilities for applications, because they give the “smallest” nontrivial ultrapowers. Given a function f : I → J and an ultraﬁlter U over I, we deﬁne f[U] = {Y ⊆ J : f−1(Y ) ∈ U}. It is easy to see that f[U] is an ultraﬁlter over J.
10 H. JEROME KEISLER
Deﬁnition 8.1. Given ultraﬁlters U over I and V over J, V ≤RK U means that there exists a function f : I → J such that V = f[U]. We write U ≡RK V if [U ≤RK V and V ≤RK U], and U <RK V if [U ≤RK V but not U ≡RK V ]. Note that if V ≤RK U then min{|Y| : Y ∈ V} ≤ min{|X| : X ∈ U}. It is clear that ≤RK is transitive and symmetric. It is also upward directed— one can check that whenever V,W are ultraﬁlters and U = V ×W, we have V ≤RK U and W ≤RK U. It is not hard to see that an ultraﬁlter U is countably incomplete if and only if there is a free ultraﬁlter V over N such that V ≤RK U. The following result was found independently by several people (for a proof see [10], Theorem 9.2). Theorem 8.2. Let U be an ultraﬁlter over I and let f : I → J. Then we have f[U] ≡RK U if and only if the restriction of f to some X ∈ U is one to one. The next result gives the connection between the pre-ordering ≤RK and ultrapowers. It shows that higher ultraﬁlters with respect to ≤RK give bigger ultrapowers with respect to elementary embeddability.
Proposition 8.3. ([25]; see also [4] and [9], Exercise 4.3.41). Let U be an ultraﬁlter over I and V be an ultraﬁlter over J. Then V ≤RK U if and only if for every A, ∏V A is elementarily embeddable in∏U A. Also, V ≡RK U if and only if for every A,∏V A∼ =∏U A. A recurrent theme in the literature is to exploit the interplay between ultraﬁlters V ≤RK U and elements of an ultrapower modulo U (see, for example, [3], [4], [5],[6],[36],[40],[42]). To explain the idea, we introduce some notation and state a result. Let U be an ultraﬁlter over I and let B =∏U A. For each function f : I → A, let B[f] be the set of all elements (g◦f)U ∈B where g : A → A. We make several observations: If f : I → A then f[U] ≤RK U. If f,h : I → Aand h[U] ≤RK f[U] then hU ∈ B[f]. If f is a constant function, then f[U] is principal and B[f] = d(A). If the structure A has a function symbol for every g : A → A, then B[f] is just the substructure of B generated by fU. Proposition 8.4. Suppose U is an ultraﬁlter over I, B = ∏U A, and f is a function from I into A. (i) B[f] ≺B. (ii) B[f] ∼ =∏f[U]A.(iii) If f[U] ≡RK U then B[f] = B.(iv) If |I|≤|A| and B[f] = B, then f[U] ≡RK U. Proof. (i) is proved by induction on complexity of formulas. (ii) f[U] is an ultraﬁlter over A, and the isomorphism is given by the mapping (g◦f)U 7→ gf[U]. (iii) Suppose f[U] ≡RK U. By Theorem 8.2, there is an X ∈ U such that the restriction of f to X is one to one. Then for any h : I → A there exists g : A → A such that (g◦f)U = hU, and hence B[f] = B. (iv) Suppose |I| ≤ |A| and B[f] = B. Then there is a one to one functionh : I → A. Since B[f] = B, hU = (g ◦ f)U for some g : A → A. Then h[U] =( g◦f)[U] = g[f[U]], so h[U] ≤RK f[U]. Since h is one to one we have U ≡RK h[U], and f[U] ≤RK U by deﬁnition, so f[U] ≡RK U.
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION 11
One can apply Proposition 8.4 to show that if V,W are free ultraﬁlters over J,K and U = V ×W, then V <RK U and W <RK U. (Hint: We have already observed that V ≤RK U. To show V <RK U, take A = J, let f be the projection from J×K onto J, prove that B[f] ̸= B, and apply Proposition 8.4 (iii)). We now turn to the ultraﬁlters over N. The Stone-ˇCech compactiﬁcation of the discrete topology on N is denoted by β(N), and can be deﬁned as the topology on the set of all ultraﬁlters over N which has as a closed base the family of all sets {U ∈ β(N) : X ∈ U} where X ∈ P(N). The Stone representation theorem ([52]) shows that β(N) is a compact totally disconnected Hausdorﬀ space. One can identify each n ∈ N with the principal ultraﬁlter which contains the singleton {n}, so that β(N)\N is the space of all free ultraﬁlters over N. W. Rudin [45] ﬁrst discovered that there are free ultraﬁlters over N with diﬀerent topological properties. Assuming the continuum hypothesis, he proved that the space β(N)\N is not point homogeneous. Frol´ık [15] later proved this fact in ZFC. Ng and Render [40] used the Rudin-Keisler ordering on βN to prove the following theorem about ultrapowers indexed by N. Theorem 8.5. Let U be a free ultraﬁlter over N, let A be inﬁnite, and let S be the topology on∏U A whose closed basis is the family of all sets of the form {fU : f ∈ CN} where C ⊆ A. Then S is not countably compact. We say that a free ultraﬁlter U over N is minimal if there is no free ultraﬁlter V over N such that V <RK U. Note that if U is minimal then there is no free ultraﬁlter V over any set J such that V <RK U. Assuming Martin’s axiom, Booth [6] proved that minimal ultraﬁlters exist, and Blass [4] proved that there are 22ω minimal ultraﬁlters. On the other hand, Kunen [35] proved that the existence of minimal ultraﬁlters is independent of ZFC. There are several natural equivalent conditions for a minimal ultraﬁlter. Theorem 8.6. (Kunen, Rowbottom; see [10]) Let U be a free ultraﬁlter over N. The following are equivalent: (i) U is minimal; (ii) U is selective (i.e., U contains a choice set for every partition of N into inﬁnitely many classes which are not elements of U); (iii) U is Ramsey (i.e., U contains a homogeneous set for every partition of [N]k into two classes, where [N]k is the set of unordered k-tuples from N) There are also nice conditions which involve ultrapowers. Here is a condition which is a variant of a theorem of Benci and Di Nasso [2]. It can be proved using Theorem 8.6 (iii). Theorem 8.7. A free ultraﬁlter U over N is minimal if and only if for each x ∈ ∏U R there is a function g : N → R such that gU = x and g is either constant, strictly increasing, or strictly decreasing. The following theorem is a variant of results of Puritz [42] and Ng and Render [40], and is a consequence of Proposition 8.4. Theorem 8.8. Let A be an inﬁnite structure, U be a free ultraﬁlter over N, and B =∏U A. (i) U is minimal if and only if for every f : N → A, either B[f] = d(A) or B[f] = B.
12 H. JEROME KEISLER
(ii) Suppose A has symbols for every function g : A → A. Then U is minimal if and only if the only substructures of B are d(A) and B itself.
9. Regular ultrafilters
In this section we introduce the regular ultraﬁlters, which behave especially well with respect to the ultrapower construction. Deﬁnition 9.1. A free ultraﬁlter U over I is called regular if there is a set E ⊆ U such that |E| = |I| and each i ∈ I belongs to only ﬁnitely many X ∈ E. We begin with some easy facts about regular ultraﬁlters. Proposition 9.2. (i) If J is inﬁnite, I = Pω(J), and {i ∈ I : j ∈ i}∈ U for each j ∈ J, then U is regular. (ii) There exist regular ultraﬁlters over each inﬁnite set I. (iii) Every regular ultraﬁlter is countably incomplete and uniform. (iv) Suppose U is a regular ultraﬁlter over I and V is an ultraﬁlter over J. If |I| = |J| and U ≤RK V , then V is regular. If |J|≤|I| then U ×V and V ×U are regular. It is obvious that if U is an ultraﬁlter over I, then any ultrapower∏U A has cardinality at most |AI|. The following result shows that when U is regular, this maximum cardinality is attained.
Theorem 9.3. (Frayne, Morel and Scott [14]) If U is a regular ultraﬁlter over I and A is inﬁnite, then |∏U A| = |AI|. It follows that each inﬁnite set has ultrapowers of arbitrarily large cardinality. Here is another consequence, whose statement does not mention ultrapowers. Suppose L has at least a unary predicate symbol P, and let PA be the interpretation of P in A. By a (κ,λ)-structure we mean a structure A such that |A| = κ and |PA| = λ. Corollary 9.4. Suppose κ,λ, and µ are cardinals such that ω ≤ λ ≤ κ. Then every (κ,λ)-structure has an elementary extension which is a (κµ,λµ)-structure.
While Theorem 9.3 gives a simple formula for the cardinality of a regular ultrapower, cardinalities of regular ultraproducts are much more complicated. Given a regular ultraﬁlter U over I, let Fin(U) be the set of inﬁnite cardinalities of ultraproducts ∏U Ai where each Ai is ﬁnite. S. Koppelberg [32] showed that |2I| ∈ Fin(U). Shelah ([49], page 357) showed that for each ﬁnite set of C cardinals κ such that κ = κω < |2I|, there is a regular ultraﬁlter U over I with Fin(U) = C ∪{|2I|}. Using the methods of [27] and [32] one can get various examples where Fin(U) is inﬁnite. The next result shows that regular ultrapowers are large in a model-theoretic sense. A structure A is called κ-universal if every structure B of cardinality |B| < κ which is elementarily equivalent to A is elementarily embeddable in A. Morley and Vaught [39] showed that every κ-saturated structure is κ+-universal.
Theorem 9.5. (Frayne, Morel and Scott [14]; Keisler [26]) Suppose U is an ultraﬁlter over a set of cardinality κ. Then U is regular if and only if whenever |L|≤ κ, every ultrapower∏U A is κ+-universal.
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION 13 It is natural to ask: When is∏U A κ+-saturated? The next result shows that the answer depends only on the complete theory of A. Theorem 9.6. (Keisler [26]) Let U be a regular ultraﬁlter over a set of cardinality κ. If |L| ≤ κ and A ≡ B, then ∏U A is κ+-saturated if and only if ∏U B is κ+-saturated. Let us say that a regular ultraﬁlter U over a set of cardinality κ saturates a complete theory T if for every model A of T,∏U A is κ+-saturated. By Theorem 9.6, it does not matter which model of T we take. Given two complete theories S,T with countable vocabularies, we write S ▹ T if every regular ultraﬁlter which saturates T saturates S. This relation can be used to classify complete theories. Intuitively, higher theories in this ordering are more complex than lower ones. The ▹-class of T is the set of all S such that S ▹ T and T ▹ S. It is clear that ▹ is is reﬂexive and transitive, so it induces a partial order on the ▹-classes. The paper [26] showed that there are at least two ▹-classes, including a lowest and a highest ▹-class, and posed several questions which are still open, including: Is this partial order linear? How many ▹-classes are there? Is there a syntactical characterization of the ▹-classes? The following theorem gives some partial results. Theorem 9.7. (Shelah [47]) There are at least four ▹-classes, including a lowest, second lowest, and highest. There are syntactical conditions for the lowest (stable theories without the ﬁnite cover property) and second lowest (stable theories with the ﬁnite cover property).
Recently, Malliaris [38] has made further progress on this problem.
We conclude this section with a discussion of ultraﬁlters which are uniform and countably incomplete but not regular. If there is a ﬁrst measurable cardinal κ, one can give an easy example of such an ultraﬁlter over κ. Any countably complete free ultraﬁlter U over κ is uniform and not regular. Let V be a free ultraﬁlter over N. Then both U ×V and V ×U are uniform and countably incomplete, and ∏U×V A ∼ =∏V×U A ∼ =∏V A whenever |A| < κ. Then in view of Theorem 9.3,U ×V and V ×U are both non-regular. In [9] we asked whether there are any uniform non-regular ultraﬁlters on an inﬁnite set of cardinality smaller than the ﬁrst measurable cardinal. A related question is whether a set A can have ultrapowers whose cardinality is not a power of |A|. These questions have prompted a great deal of research. Ketonen [30] showed that if there is a uniform non-regular ultraﬁlter over ω1, then O# exists, which implies the consistency of various large cardinal axioms with ZFC. This suggested that one may need large cardinal assumptions to get uniform non-regular ultraﬁlters. Donder [11] proved that the statement “Every uniform ultraﬁlter is regular” is consistent relative to ZFC. Foreman, Magidor and Shelah [13] have shown that the statements “There exist uniform non-regular ultraﬁlters over each successor of a regular cardinal” and “There is a uniform ultraﬁlter U over ω1 such that |∏U ω1| = ω1” are consistent relative to ZFC plus a large cardinal axiom. Jin and Shelah [17] have shown that the statements “There is a uniform ultraﬁlter U such that the cardinality of∏U N is (1) inaccessible, (2) a singular strong limit cardinal” are consistent relative to ZFC plus a large cardinal axiom. Such ultraﬁlters must be non-regular by Theorem 9.3.
14 H. JEROME KEISLER
10. Good ultrafilters and isomorphic ultrapowers
In this last section we introduce good ultraﬁlters, which are of interest because they produce ultrapowers which are as saturated as possible. We then discuss the well-known result that two elementarily equivalent structures have isomorphic ultrapowers. Deﬁnition 10.1. An ultraﬁlter U over I is good if for each f : Pω(I) → U such that a ⊆ b implies f(a) ⊇ f(b), there exists g : Pω(I) → U such that a,b ∈Pω(I) implies g(a) ⊆ f(a) and g(a∪b) = g(a)∩g(b). It is easily seen that every free ultraﬁlter over a countable set is good.
Proposition 10.2. Every countably incomplete good ultraﬁlter is regular.
Proof. This is stated as Exercise 6.1.3 in [9]. We give a proof here. Suppose U is a countably incomplete good ultraﬁlter over I. Take sets X0 ⊇ X1 ⊇··· in U such that∩n Xn = ∅. Deﬁne f : Pω(I) → U by f(a) = X|a|. Since U is good there exists g : Pω(I) → U such that f and g are as in Deﬁnition 10.1. Then the family E = {g({i}) : i ∈ I} makes U regular.
 The converse of Proposition 10.2 is not true. For example, let U be a regular ultraﬁlter over I, V be a regular ultraﬁlter over J, and |J|≤|I|. Then V ×U is good if and only if U is good. If either |J| < |I| or V is not good, then U ×V is regular but not good. Good ultraﬁlters were introduced in Keisler [18] and [23], where their existence was proved under the assumption of the generalized continuum hypothesis. Kunen later proved their existence outright. Theorem 10.3. (Kunen [34]) For every inﬁnite set I, there exist 22|I| countably incomplete good ultraﬁlters over I.
For good ultraﬁlters, unlike regular ultraﬁlters in general, there is a simple formula for the cardinality of an ultraproduct of ﬁnite sets.
Theorem 10.4. (Shelah [49], page 343). Let U be a good ultraﬁlter over I, and suppose each Ai is ﬁnite. Then the cardinality of∏U Ai is either ﬁnite or |2I|. The next result gives the main model-theoretic property of good ultraﬁlters. Theorem 5.6 is the special case where κ = ω.
Theorem 10.5. (Keisler [22], [26]) Let U be an ultraﬁlter over a set of cardinality κ. The following are equivalent: (i) U is good. (ii) Every ultrapower∏U A with a vocabulary of cardinality ≤ κ is κ+-saturated. (iii) Every ultraproduct ∏U Ai with a vocabulary of cardinality ≤ κ is κ+saturated. (iv) Every ultraproduct∏U Ai with a vocabulary of cardinality≤ κ is κ+-universal. Under the generalized continuum hypothesis, this gives a ﬁrst version of the result that elementarily equivalent structures have isomorphic ultrapowers. Theorem 10.6. (Keisler [18]) Assume that 2κ = κ+. Suppose that |L|≤ κ, A,B have cardinality ≤ 2κ, and A≡B. Then∏U A∼ =∏U B for some ultraﬁlter U overa set of cardinality κ.
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION 15
Proof. We give a proof from Theorem 10.5. Let U be a good ultraﬁlter. By Theorem 10.5 and 2κ = κ+, the ultrapowers∏U A and∏U B are saturated structures of cardinality κ+. By Corollary 3.3 they are also elementarily equivalent, so they are isomorphic by the result of Morley and Vaught.
A decade later, Shelah eliminated the generalized continuum hypothesis from this theorem, but with an ultraﬁlter over a set of cardinality 2κ instead of κ. Theorem 10.7. (Shelah [48]) Suppose that A,B have cardinality ≤ κ, and A≡B. Then∏U A∼ =∏U B for some ultraﬁlter U over a set of cardinality 2κ. Shelah [50] showed that it is not provable in ZFC that whenever A,B are countable and A ≡ B, there is an ultraﬁlter U over a countable set such that ∏U A ∼ = ∏U B. Thus when κ = ω, Theorem 10.6 really needs the continuum hypothesis, and in Theorem 10.7 one cannot always take U over a countable set. Combining Theorem 10.7 with L o´s’s Theorem 3.1, we get algebraic characterizations of elementary equivalence, elementary embeddings, and elementary classes. Corollary 10.8. (Isomorphism theorem) A≡B if and only if there is an ultraﬁlter U such that∏U A∼ =∏U B.Corollary 10.9. h : A ≺ B if and only if there is an ultraﬁlter U and an iso-morphism j :∏U A ∼ =∏U B such that e ◦ h = j ◦ d, where d : A ≺∏U A ande : B≺∏U B are the natural embeddings. Corollary 10.10. A class K of L-structures is the class of all models of some ﬁrst order theory if and only if K is closed under ultraproducts and isomorphisms, and the complement of K is closed under ultrapowers.
Corollary 10.11. A class K of L-structures is the class of all models of some ﬁrst order sentence if and only if both K and its complement are closed under ultraproducts and isomorphisms.
References
1. V. Benci, A construction of a nonstandard universe, pp. 471-478 in Advances in Dynamical Systems and Quantum Physics, ed. by S. Albeverio et. al., World Scientiﬁc 1995.
2. V. Benci and M. Di Nasso, Alpha-theory: an elementary axiomatics for nonstandard analysis, Expositiones Math. 21 (2003), 355-386.
3. M. Benedikt, Ultraﬁlters which extend measures, J. Symb. Logic 63 (1998), 638-662.
4. A. Blass, The Rudin-Keisler ordering of P-points, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 179 (1973), 145166.
5. A. Blass, A model-theoretic view of some special ultraﬁlters, pp. 79-90 in Logic Colloquium 77, ed. by A. Macintyre et. al., North-Holland 1978.
6. D. Booth, Ultraﬁlters on a countable set, Annals of Math. Logic 2 (1971), 1-24.
7. C.C. Chang, Ultraproducts and other methods of constructing models, pp. 85-121 in Sets, Models and Reecursion Theory, ed. by J.N. Crossley, North-Holland 1967.
8. C.C. Chang and H.J. Keisler, Applications of ultrproducts of pairs of cardinals to the theory of models, Paciﬁc J. Math. 12 (1962), 835-845.
9. C.C. Chang and H.J. Keisler, Model Theory, Third Edition, North Holland Elsevier, 1990.
10. W.W.Comfort and S. Negrepontis, The Theory of Ultraﬁlters, Springer-Verlag 1974.
11. H.-D. Donder, Regularity of ultraﬁlters and the core model, Israel J. Math. 63 (1988), 289-322. 12. P. Eklof, Ultraproducts for algebraists, pp. 105-138 in Handbook of Mathematical Logic, ed. by J. Barwise, North-Holland 1977.
13. M. Foreman, M. Magidor, and S. Shelah, Martin’s maximum, saturated ideals, and non-regular ultraﬁlters. Part II, Annals of Math. 127 (1988), 521-545.
16 H. JEROME KEISLER
14. T.E. Frayne, A.C. Morel, and D.S. Scott, Reduced direct products, Fund. Math. 51 (1962), 195-228 (Abstract: Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 5 (1958), p. 674).
15. Z. Frol´ık, Sums of ultraﬁlters, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 73 (1967), 87-91.
16. E. Hewitt, Rings of real-valued continuous functions, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 64 (1948), 45-99.
17. R. Jin and S. Shelah, Possible size of an ultrapower of ω, Archive for Math. Logic 38 (1999), 61-77.
18. H.J. Keisler, Ultraproducts and elementary classes, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 64 (= Indag. Math. 23) (1961), 477.495. 19. H.J. Keisler, Some applications of the theory of models to set theory, pp. 80-86 in Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, ed. by E. Nagel et. al., Stanford Univ. Press 1962.
20. H.J. Keisler, Limit ultrapowers, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 107 (1963), 383-408.
21. H.J. Keisler, On cardinalities of ultraproducts, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 70 (1964), p. 644-647.
22. H.J. Keisler, Ultraproducts and saturated models, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 67 (= Indag. Math. 26) (1964), 178-186.
23. H.J. Keisler, Good ideals in ﬁelds of sets, Annals of Math. 79 (1964), 338-359.
24. H.J. Keisler, A survey of ultraproducts, pp. 112-126 in Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, ed. by Y. Bar-Hillel, North-Holland 1965.
25. H.J. Keisler, Mimeographed Lecture Notes, U.C.L.A. 1967.
26. H.J. Keisler, Ultraproducts which are not saturated, J. Symbolic Logic 32 (1967), 23-46.
27. H.J. Keisler, Ultraproducts of ﬁnite sets, J. Symbolic Logic 32 (1967), 47-57.
28. H.J. Keisler, Foundations of Inﬁnitesimal Calculus (online editiion) (2007), available at www.math.wisc.edu/∼keisler.
29. H.J. Keisler and A. Tarski, From accessible to inaccessible cardinals, Fund. Math. 53 (1964), p. 225-308. 30. J. Ketonen, Nonregular ultraﬁlters and large cardinals, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 224 (1976), 61-73. 31. S.B. Kochen, Ultraproducts in the theory of models, Ann. Math. Ser. 2, 74 (1961), 221-261.
32. S. Koppelberg, Cardinalities of ultraproducts of ﬁnite sets, J. Symbolic Logic 45 (1980), 574584.
33. V. Kanovei and M. Reeken, Nonstandard Analysis, Axiomatically, Springer 2004.
34. K. Kunen, Ultraﬁlters and independent sets, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 172, (1972), 199-206.
35. K. Kunen, Some points in β(N), Math. Proc. Cambridge Philosophical Soc. 80(3) (1976), 385-398.
36. D. Lascar, Stability in Model Theory, Longman 1987.
37. J. L o´s, Quelques remarques, th´eor`emes et probl`emes sur les classes d´eﬁnissables d’alg`ebres, pp. 98-113 in Mathematical Interpretations of Formal Systems, North-Holland 1955.
38. M. Malliaris, Realization of φ-types and Keisler’s order, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, in press.
39. M. Morley and R. Vaught, Homogeneous universal models, Math. Scand. 11 (1962),37-57.
40. S-A Ng and H. Render, The Puritz order and its relationship to the Rudin-Keisler order, pp. 157-166 in Reuniting the Antipodes, ed. by P. Schuster et. al., Kluwer 2001.
41. B. Posp´ıˇsil, Remark on bicompact spaces, Ann. Math. 38 (1937), 845-846.
42. C. Puritz, Ultraﬁlters and standard functions in non-standard arithmetic, Proc. London Math. Soc. 22 (1971), 705-733.
43. M.O. Rabin, Arithmetical extensions with prescribed cardinality, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 62 (= Indag. Math. 21) (1959), 439-
446.
44. M.E. Rudin, Types of ultraﬁlters, pp. 147-151 in Topology Seminar, Wisconsin 1965, Annals of Math. Studies no. 60 (1966).
45. W. Rudin, Homogeneity problems in the theory of ˇCech compactiﬁcations, Duke Math. Journal 23 (1956), 409-419.
46. S. Shelah, On the cardinality of ultraproducts of ﬁnite sets, J. Symbolic Logic 35 (1970), 83-84.
47. S. Shelah, Saturation of ultrapowers and Keisler’s order, Ann. Math. Logic 4 (1972), 75-114.
48. S. Shelah, Every two elementarily equivalent models have isomorphic ultrapowers, Israel J. Math. 10 (1972), 224-233.
49. S. Shelah, Classiﬁcation Theory, Revised Edition, North-Holland 1990.
THE ULTRAPRODUCT CONSTRUCTION 17
50. S. Shelah, Vive la diﬀ´erence I: nonisomorphism of ultrapowers of countable models, pp. 357405 in Set Theory of the Continuum, Springer-Verlag 1992.
51. T. Skolem, ¨Uber die Nicht-Charakterisierbarkeit der Zahlenreihe mittels endlich oder abz¨ahlbar unendlich vieler Aussagen mit ausschliesslich Zahlenvariablen, Fund. Math. 23 (1934), 150-161.
52. M.H. Stone, The representation theorem for Boolean algebras, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 40 (1936), 37-111. 53. A. Tarski, Une contribution `a la th´eorie de la mesure, Fund. Math. 15 (1930), 42-50.
54. G. Weaver, Henkin-Keisler Models, Springer 1997.
Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin, 480 Lincoln Drive, Madison WI 53706 E-mail address: keisler@math.wisc.ed
