# 超实数从何而来？ - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2018年09月02日 15:52:08[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：236
    今年8月31日，我们开始向全国高校投放J.Keisler为担任微积分手机版课程的数学教员撰写的教学参考书（也是手机版）。
    该参考书的第一章，共计6个小节，由浅入深，集中讲解了超实数从何而来的问题。
    涉及超实数的公理组共计有6条，由此公理组系统展开整个微积分理论体系，完全与物理实践无关。
    为培养00后新一代大学生，深入学习、研讨数学基础问题，大家共勉之。
    袁萌   陈启清   9月2日
附：超实数公理组
THE HYPERREAL NUMBERS
We will assume that the reader is familiar with the real number system and develop a new object, called a hyperreal number system. The deﬁnition of the real numbers and the basic existence and uniqueness theorems are brieﬂy outlined in Section 1F, near the end of this chapter. That section also explains some useful notions from modern algebra, such as a ring, a complete ordered ﬁeld, an ideal, and a homomorphism. If any of these terms are unfamiliar, you should read through Section 1F. We do not require any knowledge of modern algebra except for a modest vocabulary. In Sections 1A–1E we introduce axioms for the hyperreal numbers and obtain some ﬁrst consequences of the axioms. In the optional Section 1G at the end of this chapter we build a hyperreal number system as an ultrapower of the real number system. This proves that there exists a structure which satisﬁes the axioms. We conclude the chapter with the construction of Kanovei and Shelah [KS 2004] of a hyperreal number system which is deﬁnable in set theory. This shows that the hyperreal number system exists in the same sense that the real number system exists.
1A. Structure of the Hyperreal Numbers (§1.4, §1.5)
In this and the next section we assume only Axioms A, B, and C below.
Axiom A R is a complete ordered ﬁeld.
Axiom B R∗ is an ordered ﬁeld extension of R.
Axiom C R∗ has a positive inﬁnitesimal, that is, an element ε such that 0 < ε and ε < r for every positive r ∈R. In the next section     
we will introduce two powerful additional axioms which are needed for our treatment of the calculus. However, the algebraic facts
2 1. The Hyperreal Numbers
about inﬁnitesimals which underlie the intuitive picture of the hyperreal line follow from Axioms A–C alone. We call R the ﬁeld of real numbers and R∗ the ﬁeld of hyperreal numbers. Definition 1.1. An element x ∈R∗ is inﬁnitesimal if |x| < r for all positive real r; ﬁnite if |x| < r for some real r; inﬁnite if |x| > r for all real r. Two elements x,y ∈ R∗ are said to be inﬁnitely close, x ≈ y, if x−y is inﬁnitesimal. (Thus x is inﬁnitesimal if and only if x ≈ 0). Notice that a positive inﬁnitesimal is hyperreal but not real, and that the only real inﬁnitesimal is 0. Definition 1.2. Given a hyperreal number x ∈R∗, the monad of x is theset monad(x) = {y ∈R∗: x ≈ y}. The galaxy of x is the set galaxy(x) = {y ∈R∗: x−y is ﬁnite}. Thus monad(0) is the set of inﬁnitesimals and galaxy(0) is the set of ﬁnite hyperreal numbers. In Elementary Calculus, the pictorial device of an inﬁnitesimal microscope is used to illustrate part of a monad, and an inﬁnite telescope is used to illustrate part of an inﬁnite galaxy. Figure 1 shows how the hyperreal line is drawn. In Section 2B we will give a rigorous treatment of inﬁnitesimal microscopes and telescopes so the instructor can use them in new situations.
1A. Structure of the Hyperreal Numbers（以下省略）
