# 马克思《数学手稿》对菲氏无穷小说: no！（I） - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2018年05月22日 09:05:02[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：120
    根据马克思《数学手稿》最新英译本，我们可以断定：马克思《数学手稿》的辩证思想至今仍然放射出数学真理的光芒，对菲氏无穷小说：no！！
    对此，国内菲氏微积分徒子徒孙，你们有何感想?
袁萌   5月22日
附：Marx’s brilliant study ofmathematics
    ‘The MathematicalManuscripts of Karl Marx’, New Park Publications, 280pp. ￡25 hardback, ￡15paperback. Reviewed by Andy Blunden;
    Source: Labour Review (WRP), June 1983.
    ONE hundred yearsafter the death of Karl Marx, New Park Publications this month publish for thefirst time in English the Mathematical Manuscripts of Karl Marx. Themathematical work of the greatest revolutionary thinker（思想家） of our time hadremained virtually closed book until 1968 when NAUK published the Germanedition which has provided the core of material for the present book.
    The firstextracts from the manuscripts were published in 1933 in Pod Znamenem Marksizma,the journal founded by the Bolsheviks, on the 50th anniversary of Marx’s death.This followed Lenin’s directive of 1921 to acquire copies of all Marx andEngels’ manuscripts available abroad. After that, 20 or 30 years elapsed beforework was apparently resumed.
    Ernst Kolman andSonia Yanovskaya, who contribute the articles, ‘Karl Marx and Mathematics’(1968) and the ‘Preface’ (1968) respectively, and a joint article ‘Hegel andMathematics’ (1931), to the present volume, worked on the manuscripts both inthe 1930s and in the more recent period. Kolman brought them to world attentionat a congress in London in 1931, and it is said that Yanovskaya made them herlife’s Work, dying before the publication of the NAUK edition.
    No explanation is given, however, as to why nothing was publishedrelating to the manuscripts between 1933 and 1968. Indeed, even in the 15 yearssince the authoritative edition of 1968 was published in the Soviet Union, nofurther translations or analyses have emerged until New Park were able tocompile this volume, Even the otherwise complete Collected Works of Marx andEngels currently being published by Lawrence and Wishart is not plannned toinclude them.
    Is this because the Mathematical Manuscripts of Karl Marx are of littlepolitical, philosophical or historical interest? Are they an historicalcuriosity? Certainly not! And the excellent additional and explanatory materialincluded in the New Park edition prove that this is not so and that the Sovietscholars who devoted many years of their lives to work on the manuscripts didnot believe it so.
    As Ernst Kolman says in concluding his contribution:
    ‘As a result of all this worklasting many years a book has appeared which contains Marx’s ideas on a seriesof the most important problems in the history of mathematics as a whole and ofits individual concepts, as well as on their epistemological significance,ideas which, despite the head-spinning pace of the development of mathematicsin the ’80s of the last century — among which and in particular including itslogical-philosophical basis — have not lost their contemporaneity in theslightest.
    ‘For historians ofmathematics and for philosophers working with the philosophical problems ofmathematics, Marx’s views will serve as a guide — not in the form of aquotation, every letter of which is followed as if counting out an emergencyration, but rather in the form of a matchless example of creative, concreteapplication of dialectical thinking. ...’ (p.234)
    And let us add — not only of interest to mathematicians andphilosophers — but also an invaluable guide and inspiration for allrevolutionary fighters, grappling with the advanced theoretical problems posedby the break-up, of world capitalism and the urgent need for the preparation ofthe working class for the ‘reversal of roles’ (see p. 50) — for the seizure ofpower.
    Many readers may be deterred by their lack of knowledge of mathematicsand put-off by the array of algebraic formulae a flick through the pages ofthis book will show. It should be remembered that Marx wrote these manuscriptsfor the purpose of clarifying himself and Engels, who remarked in his letter ofAugust 10, .18 8 1. (see p. XX VII):
    ‘Yesterday I found thecourage at last to study your mathematical manuscripts even without referencebooks, and 1 was pleased to find that I did not need them. 1 compliment you onyour work. The thing is as clear as daylight, so that we cannot wonder enoughat the way the mathematicians insist on mystifying it.’
    And mathematical beginners will feel for Marx when he wrote to Engels(January 11, 1858) during work on Capital:
    ‘I am so damnedly held up by mistakesin calculation in the working out of the economic principles that out ofdespair I intend to master algebra promptly. Arithmetic remains foreign to me.But I am again shooting my way rapidly along the algebraic route’. (p. VII)（全文待续）
