# 马克思《数学手稿》对菲氏无穷小说: no！ - 袁萌专栏 - CSDN博客
2018年05月22日 03:01:11[yuanmeng001](https://me.csdn.net/yuanmeng001)阅读数：178
        根据马克思《数学手稿》最新英译本，我们可以断定：马克思《数学手稿》的辩证思想至今仍然放射出数学真理的光芒，对菲氏无穷小说：no！！
        对此，国内菲氏微积分徒子徒孙，你们有何感想?
袁萌   5月22日
附：Marx’s brilliant study ofmathematics
           （建议读者从本文后半部分入手阅读）
‘    The MathematicalManuscripts of Karl Marx’, New Park Publications, 280pp. ￡25 hardback, ￡15paperback. Reviewed by Andy Blunden;
    Source: Labour Review (WRP), June 1983.
    ONE hundred yearsafter the death of Karl Marx, New Park Publications this month publish for thefirst time in English the Mathematical Manuscripts of Karl Marx. Themathematical work of the greatest revolutionary thinker（思想家） of our time hadremained virtually closed book until 1968 when NAUK published the Germanedition which has provided the core of material for the present book.
    The firstextracts from the manuscripts were published in 1933 in Pod Znamenem Marksizma,the journal founded by the Bolsheviks, on the 50th anniversary of Marx’s death.This followed Lenin’s directive of 1921 to acquire copies of all Marx andEngels’ manuscripts available abroad. After that, 20 or 30 years elapsed beforework was apparently resumed.
    Ernst Kolman andSonia Yanovskaya, who contribute the articles, ‘Karl Marx and Mathematics’(1968) and the ‘Preface’ (1968) respectively, and a joint article ‘Hegel andMathematics’ (1931), to the present volume, worked on the manuscripts both inthe 1930s and in the more recent period. Kolman brought them to world attentionat a congress in London in 1931, and it is said that Yanovskaya made them herlife’s Work, dying before the publication of the NAUK edition.
    No explanation is given, however, as to why nothing was publishedrelating to the manuscripts between 1933 and 1968. Indeed, even in the 15 yearssince the authoritative edition of 1968 was published in the Soviet Union, nofurther translations or analyses have emerged until New Park were able tocompile this volume, Even the otherwise complete Collected Works of Marx andEngels currently being published by Lawrence and Wishart is not plannned toinclude them.
    Is this because the Mathematical Manuscripts of Karl Marx are of littlepolitical, philosophical or historical interest? Are they an historicalcuriosity? Certainly not! And the excellent additional and explanatory materialincluded in the New Park edition prove that this is not so and that the Sovietscholars who devoted many years of their lives to work on the manuscripts didnot believe it so.
    As Ernst Kolman says in concluding his contribution:
    ‘As a result of all this worklasting many years a book has appeared which contains Marx’s ideas on a seriesof the most important problems in the history of mathematics as a whole and ofits individual concepts, as well as on their epistemological significance, ideaswhich, despite the head-spinning pace of the development of mathematics in the’80s of the last century — among which and in particular including itslogical-philosophical basis — have not lost their contemporaneity in theslightest.
        ‘For historians ofmathematics and for philosophers working with the philosophical problems ofmathematics, Marx’s views will serve as a guide — not in the form of aquotation, every letter of which is followed as if counting out an emergencyration, but rather in the form of a matchless example of creative, concreteapplication of dialectical thinking. ...’ (p.234)
    And let us add — not only of interest to mathematicians andphilosophers — but also an invaluable guide and inspiration for allrevolutionary fighters, grappling with the advanced theoretical problems posedby the break-up, of world capitalism and the urgent need for the preparation ofthe working class for the ‘reversal of roles’ (see p. 50) — for the seizure ofpower.
    Many readers may be deterred by their lack of knowledge of mathematicsand put-off by the array of algebraic formulae a flick through the pages ofthis book will show. It should be remembered that Marx wrote these manuscriptsfor the purpose of clarifying himself and Engels, who remarked in his letter ofAugust 10, .18 8 1. (see p. XX VII):
    ‘Yesterday I found thecourage at last to study your mathematical manuscripts even without referencebooks, and 1 was pleased to find that I did not need them. 1 compliment you onyour work. The thing is as clear as daylight, so that we cannot wonder enoughat the way the mathematicians insist on mystifying it.’
    And mathematical beginners will feel for Marx when he wrote to Engels(January 11, 1858) during work on Capital:
    ‘I am so damnedly held up bymistakes in calculation in the working out of the economic principles that outof despair I intend to master algebra promptly. Arithmetic remains foreign tome. But I am again shooting my way rapidly along the algebraic route’. (p. VII)
    Study of the Mathematical Manuscripts is, of course, no light exercise,but the New Park volume contains an excellent collection of additional materialwhich make the manuscripts themselves more accessible, develop the ideascontained Within them, and also stand independently as important contributionsto the development of dialectical materialism.
    In particular, Kolman and Yanovskaya’s article of 1931, Hegel andMathematics, contains a brief but monumental critique of Hegel’s philosophy, acritical analysis of the range of bourgeois philosophy, from Kant to Mach, viaa study of the nature of mathematical knowledge and an important contrastbetween the work of Marx and Hegel in natural science generally.
    Yanovskaya’s preface to the 1968 edition outlines how Marx came to hisstudy of mathematics sketches briefly the most. important aspects of his workon differential calculus which makes up. the bulk of the manuscripts, and,tells of the problems involved in their preparation for publication.
    The three letters — two from Engels and one from Marx — bring out insharp relief the unity of these two men their work on the sciences; severalaspects are further elaborated, and, in particular, Engels’ first letter castsin characteristically bold terms the most important, philosophical conclusionsMarx and he were drawing. Six appendices supplied by the Soviet editors giveexcerpts from, and commentary on, textbooks and mathematical classics that Marxconsulted, which are essential to understanding Marx’s own work andplace it in its historical context.
    Kolman’s review, ‘Karl Marx and Mathematics: On the MathematicalManuscripts of Marx’ (1968), is an excellent discussion of the relation ofmathematics to the struggle for socialism, to political economy and tophilosophy, gives a detailed history of the manuscripts, and a concise summaryof Marx’s conclusions relating to calculus and an explanation of Marx’s ownpreferred method of differentiation, outlining the significance of laterdevelopments in these areas and drawing out the essence of Marx’s contribution.
    Cyril Smith has contributed an essay, Hegel, Marx and the Calculus,written specially for this volume, explaining the significance of Marx’smathematical work as part of a living struggle. Smith shows the role that theproblem of infinity has played since ancient times and especially in relationto Hegel and Marx, and its significance in all the philosophical crises inmathematics. He concludes with an analysis of the nature of mathematicalknowledge.
    The New Park edition has reproduced, unabridged, the useful and diversenotes given in the Russian edition, plus an index to Marx’s MathematicalManuscripts.
    The manuscripts themselves contain two finished articles, ‘On theConcept of the Derived Function’, and ‘On the Differential’, with drafts andsupplements; a series of drafts and extracts on the history of differentialcalculus; an article on Taylor’s theorem and, three appendices on limitcalculus and on D'Alembert’s method of differentiation.
    Marx developed his interest in mathematics in connection with his workon Capital (see Yanovskaya p. VIII), beginning in earnest around 1858 andcontinuing to the end of his life. He was driven to do so partly by thenecessity of understanding and criticising contemporary commercial and economicliterature but principally by the necessity of giving quantitative expressionto the fundamental laws of value in capitalist society and developing theinterconnection of the laws (see Kolman p. 218-222).
    Marx clearly understood the necessity for political economy to learn touse mathematics if it was to reach its fullest development and indeedanticipated the possibility of statistical analysis of the laws of thecapitalist crisis. At the same time Marx vigorously opposed the mathematicalfetishism, characteristic of the bourgeois money-mentality, maintaining thatthe mathematical methods could never over-reach the boundary of the underlying,qualitative theory on which it was based.
    On p. 252-253, Kolman and Yanovskaya explain: ‘The increasingdifficulties offered to the mathematics of complicated forms of motion, pilingup in an ascending series in leaps from mechanics to physics, from physics tochemistry, from there to biology and onwards to the social sciences, do not, inthe dialectical materialist conception, entirely block its path, but allow itthe prospect of even “determining the main laws of capitalist economic crisis”(Marx to Engels, May 31, 1873)’.
    Around 1863, Marx’s interest was taken by differential calculus and hisinterest in this area continued side by side with his study of commercialarithmetic, etc. until 1883. Marx studied the latest textbooks, studyingproblems as a pastime as well as in concentrated study.
    To anyone who has studied mathematics to the level of the calculus, itis clear why calculus attracted interest. For here, above all other areas,mathematics manifests the dialectical leap in a way which is so explicit, andso obstinate in its contradictoriness in the face of all the attempts ofmathematical gradualism to reform it away.
    Hegel also paid great attention to the calculus. ‘Nevertheless,elementary mathematics, just like the formal logic, is not nonsense, it mustreflect something in reality and therefore it must contain certain elements ofdialectics.’ (Kolman and Yanovskaya p.250-251). And: ‘The turning point inmathematics was Descartes’ variable magnitude, With that came motion and hencedialectics in mathematics and at once, too, of necessity the differential andintegral calculus, ...’ (Dialectics of Nature, Engels, p.258)
    Thus, in the history of mathematics, Marx found a whole new source ofdialectical knowledge, reaching its sharpest point in the birth of calculus outof elementary algebra itself, ‘driven to do so by the requirements of“application,” i.e., of practice, technique, science’. (See Kolman andYanovskaya, p.245)
    In his speech at Marx’s graveside, ‘Engels said: ‘But in every fieldwhich Marx investigated — and he investigated very many fields, none of themsuperficially — in every field, even in that of mathematics, he madeindependent discoveries’. (see p.234).
    The legacy of Marx’s mathematical studies was 1,000 manuscript pages.References were made to the manuscripts in a number of letters between Marx andEngels and in Engels’s Anti-Dühring and Dialectics of Nature. Following Lenin’sdirective of 1921, the Karl Marx-Friedrich Engels Institute purchasedphotocopies of 863 closely written sheets from the German Social-DemocraticParty archives and later the remaining sheets were found.
    The German mathematician Gumbel led a team to decipher them andpublished a report in 1927 listing the wide range of subjects dealt with,sometimes only in the form of copied extracts, but also including finishedworks — all very difficult to decipher.
    In 1931 there was a change and Kolman and Yanovskaya took over the workwith a new team. In June 1931, Kolman attended the Second InternationalCongress of the History of Science and Technology with a group of Sovietscientists led by Bukharin. The Bolshevik contributions at the congress had aprofound effect on a generation of young British scientists. Apart from hisreport on Marx’s mathematical manuscripts, Kolman spoke on the crises ofmathematics (see Science at the Crossroads, Kniga Ltd., 1971)
    By 1933, the Soviet workers were able to publish extensive excerpts tocommemorate the 50th anniversary of Marx’s death, including the article on‘Hegel and Mathematics’ included in the New Park edition.
    Work was renewed in the 1950s and strengthened from 1960 onward and ateam led by Sonia Yanovskaya meticulously deciphered, translated and edited themanuscripts and researched the sources Marx had used from all over Europe.Yanovskaya died in October 1966, but the manuscripts were finally published in1968. Kolman left the Soviet Union and died in Sweden in 1979.
    Publication of the manuscripts in English together with the uniquecollection of related material must provide an enormous stimulus now forsharpening the ideological struggle against bourgeois ideology — not onlydeepening the grasp of young cadres of the dialectical materialist method, butalso winning over sections from the scientific community attracted to the greatstrength of Marxist theory at a time when science is being stultified, starvedand degraded by the death agony of capitalism.
    Mathematics was correctly defined by Hegel as the science of quantity(see p. 239). Quantity is an objective concept derived from the movement ofmatter in all its spheres. Mathematical knowledge therefore contains realknowledge of the material world, although at a high level of abstraction. It isno coincidence then that mathematical forms find ‘application’ in materialprocesses since it was from the same material universe that they wereabstracted in the first place. (see p.268 et seq., and Anti-Dühring p.51-52)
    Mathematics thus provides students of dialectical materialism with asource of new knowledge from two aspects. Firstly, by working over the positiveresults of mathematics from both its historical and logical aspects we can deepenand concretise our grasp of the laws of dialectics. Secondly, at any givenhistorical juncture, mathematics undergoes its particular crises, giving us theopportunity to sharpen our dialectical weapons in the struggle to resolve theseproblems.
    In contrasting Marx’s method to that of Hegel, Kolman and Yanovskayastate: ‘Whereas Hegel merely tries to substantiate what already exists, it is amatter here of a transformation, the conscious change, the reconstruction ofscience on the basis of the guiding role of practice.’ (p.253)
    Marx’s writing on differential calculus contained in this volumeclearly shows that Marx set himself the task of critically reworking andresolving the problems of the foundations of the; calculus and was by no meanscontent to passively describe the dialectical moments of the calculus. And hehas made a valuable contribution in this field.
    The actual historical development of mathematics over the last centuryand a half has moved on from the particular problems with which Marx wasconcerned in relation to calculus, but has confirmed the essence of Marx’sideas on the subject. (See ‘Preface’ p. XIII-XVII)
    These problems, however, continually re-emerge at a deeper level andare linked, to methodological problems in all branches of science and closestudy of Marx’s method is essential — his synthesis of the logical andhistorical; his insistence on the highest standards of precision in science andcontempt for all ‘sleight of hand’ etc.; his insistence on the sublation of theold into the new, established more concretely with every further development ofthe new. Only by his struggle to develop his algebraic method ofdifferentiation could Marx bring out what was new in the calculus.
    As Marx remarks (p. 3): ‘First making the differentiation and thenremoving it therefore leads literally to nothing. The whole difficulty inunderstanding the differential operation (as in the negation of the negationgenerally) lies precisely in seeing how it differs from such a simple procedureand therefore leads to real results.’
    What a far cry is this from the positivists of the school of Mach andthe modern-day revisionists who want to relegate philosophy to the job of afiling-clerk for natural science and to revolutionary theory the role of apassive spectator.
    Kolman and Yanovskaya’s 1931 article ‘Hegel and Mathematics’ is amasterpiece which should be read and re-read by all those struggling to developMarxism. It is a continuation of Lenin’s theoretical work, notably ‘of Volumes14 and 38 of the Collected Works, written on the eve of the Moscow trials. Onewonders not so much that the authors ceased to publish, but that they survivedto pick up their work again 30 years later.
    Independently of whether Kolman and Yanovskaya were conscious of thepolitical implications of their philosophical contribution, it is only theTrotskyists who today can carry forward Marx’s legacy as a guide — torevolutionary practice.
    Kolman and Yanovskaya (see p. 236-238) credit Hegel’s work onmathematics with the following discoveries: That mathematics is the science ofquantity — quantity as one moment of the notion, not as its essence(quantity-fetishism), derived out of the dialectic of quality. That calculus‘contains qualitative moments’ and thus cannot be reduced to elementarymathematics. That the essence of calculus is in its application, its origin inthe requirements of practice, outside of mathematics. That without the aid ofphilosophy, mathematics cannot justify its own methods.
    The weaknesses of Hegel’s view they summarise as follows: Hegel deniedthe qualitative (dialectical) moments in elementary mathematics and insistedthat calculus was alien to mathematics, ‘brought into mathematics in anexternal manner, through external reflection’, but ‘is forced to carry the truedialectics of the development of mathematics over to his philosophical system’,although in a ‘mystifying way’.
    They also say Hegel ‘denied the possibility of constructing amathematics which would consciously apply the dialectical method’ and‘consequently ... is forced to jog along behind the mathematics of his day’ andfrequently ‘creates an apparent solution where he should have sharply posed anunsolved problem’.
    A study of these points, which are given above in a much abbreviatedform, will provide a rich source of material to deepen our understanding of howidealism imposes upon the external world images derived earlier in the process.In the struggle to subordinate the world to this idea, the idealist becomestrapped by his images, cut off from the dialectical source in external nature.By recognising the origin of the materialist ‘kernel’ of Hegel’s speculations,in the external world, Marx’s method builds up dialectics in a struggle tochange the world, and derive new knowledge.
    ‘Marx, like Hegel, consideredall efforts to provide a purely formal-logical foundation for analysis hopeless... (and) to give ... a purely intuitive-visual foundation to it ... naive’.(Kolman p.227)
    ‘Marx appreciated ... . (howLagrange) ... revealed the connection between algebra and analysis, he showedhow analysis develops out of algebra ...’ (ibid) ‘Marx critically analysed boththe method of d'Alembert as well as that of Lagrange (and Leibnitz and Newton).... and opposed all three methods with his own.’ (ibid p.232)
    On page 232, Kolman succinctly summarises Marx’s method pointing outthat Marx recognised the differential equation as an ‘operative formula’ — ‘astrategy of action’ which, when it arises, constitutes a reversal of thedifferential process, since the ‘real’ algebraic processes then arise out ofthe symbolic operational equation, which originally itself arose out of a‘real’ algebraic process.
    By means of Lagrange’s application of Taylor’s theorem Marx ‘discoveredthat the differential is the major linear portion of the increment’ whichestablished the basis of the continuity with elementary algebra.
    The great merit of his contribution is that under historicalcircumstances in which Marx could not have completed his task, he strove ‘forah algorithmic method (‘an exact instruction for the solution, by means of afinite number of steps, of a certain class of problems’) in which ‘he was on apath which has been the fundamental path of the development, of mathematics’(Kolman p. 232). Developments in these areas unknown to Marx are outlined byKolman (p. 232-233) and Smith (p. 266-268), including the way in which theseproblems were resolved in actuality.
    Marx’s method is described (Kolman p. 227) as the ‘unity of thehistorical and logical aspects’. So we could begin by outlining Marx’speriodisation of the history of the calculus:
        1. ‘The mysticaldifferential calculus’ of Newton and Leibnitz.
        2. ‘The rationaldifferential calculus’ of Euler and D'Alembert.
        3. ‘The purealgebraic calculus’ of Lagrange. (Preface p. XX).
    ‘Newton andLeibnitz, like the majority of the successors from the beginning performedoperations on the ground of the differential calculus ... All of theirintelligence was concentrated on that.’ (p. 7 8) The founders of calculus werenot concerned with how and whence their discovery had arisen from the oldmathematics.
    They were contentto juggle away the terms that experiment showed were extraneous and operatewith their new method of calculation, covering their tracks with mysticism.Newton attempted to use the proven applicability of the derivatives to therepresentation of material motion, as if this could substitute for mathematicalproof.
    If y is avariable quantity dependent on another variable x, it is possible to calculatethe increment of y resulting from a certain increment of x. The ratio betweenthese increments is a measure of the degree of variation of y in relation to xover that interval. If y was distance and x time, the ratio of the finitedifferences would be the average velocity.
    The leap comeswhen the increment in x is taken as zero, (i.e. no increment at all) and theresulting change in y is zero also. But Newton and Leibnitz, by ‘juggling away’terms which were ‘even more zero’, were able to determine a definite value forthe ratio of zeros (c.f. instantaneous speed).
    The calculusarose in this mystifying way. In the next period of Man’s historical analysis,Rational Calculus, D'Alembert attempts to correct and demystify the calculus ofNewton and Leibnitz by separating out the derivative by purely, algebraicmeans, before transforming the finite differences into infinitesimals.
    Contrary toprevailing opinion at the time, Marx credits Lagrange with initiation of thenext period of development of the foundations of calculus. Lagrange utilisedTaylor’s theorem, which allows the expression of any function in terms of apower series, of finite or infinite degree.
    Taylor’s theoremwas a product of the calculus, but it enabled the comprehension of thedifferentiation of functions without degree in terms of the algebraic functionsof definite degree (i.e. a finite number of terms) and the various derivativesappear ‘ready-made’ in the coefficients of the various terms, which can becalculated by methods not involving the ‘mystical’ transformations ofdifferential calculus. (see p. 91-100)
    Philosophy hadwrestled with the problem of comprehending motion for millennia before Newtonand Leibnitz formulated calculus. Armed with dialectical logic, Marx criticallydissected the different forms of expression for the change in the value ofvariables to which the mathematicians had hitherto paid no attention.
    In the historicallyfirst method, difference appears in its positive form as an incrementindependent of the variable to which it is added, and which then infinitelycontracts so that it can be ‘juggled away’. In the second, D'Alembert’s‘correction.’ of the ‘mystics’, the difference appears directly in its negativefor” but in the end returns to where the ‘mystics’ set out.
    In the‘algebraic’ method, there are two independent values of the variable and thedifference is developed so that a preliminary derivative is formed byseparating the difference as a factor. The identity of the two different valuesthen gives the definite derivative (see p. 127-131).
    The developmentof the difference is well known for algebraic functions and effective methodsexist fora wide class of other functions. Marx sought to generalise thealgorithmic feature of this method by use of Taylor’s theorem.
    Marx showed, withhis example of the differentiation of a quotient from the product rule (seep.70), how the operational formulae reverse themselves — being derived assymbolic results of ‘real’ processes they then express themselves as a‘strategy of action’ for ‘real’ functions — ‘as a specific type of calculationwhich already operates independently on its own ground’ (p. 20-21).
    The founders ofcalculus introduced the differential ‘metaphysically’, without bothering toshow how the differential was derived from the finite difference — it was firstassumed to exist and then afterwards it was explained. Similarly, an incrementwas supposed which had an existence independent of the variable which wasdifferentiating. Marx insisted on tracing the transition from the lower to thehigher, although, contradictorily, this required reversing the historicalprocess of the foundation of calculus.
    Marx was also interested in the equation in mathematics — with itsopposite poles, with the development and initiative shifting from one pole toanother. The equation is the fundamental dialectical contradiction inmathematics, and it is characteristic that the mathematicians have paid noattention to its development, since for formal logic, if A=B, then B=A, andthat is that.
    The reversal of the transition from ‘real’ to symbolic expressions intothe reverse transition is also a matter of indifference to the mathematicians,although it is the essence of the transition.
    Marx’s Mathematical Manuscripts must be seen as an outstanding model ofdialectical practice, and read from the standpoint from which it was written —the struggle for dialectical theory as a guide to revolutionary socialpractice.
    Marx, for whom ‘arithmetic remain(ed) foreign’ in 1858 (aged 38),enriched the dialectical method not only by critical generalisation of theresults of the sciences, but also by application of dialectical materialisttheory to the resolution of the problems of the sciences, includingmathematics.
    Engels’ Dialectics of Nature, and in particular, The Part Played byLabour in the Transition from Ape to Man, were part of the same revolutionarypractice.
    The Mathematical Manuscripts of Karl Marx confirm that Marx and Engelsworked as one. Attempts to separate off Engels’ work on the sciences aredemolished by publication of this book, which could by compared to a literarytime-bomb with a hundred-year-long fuse.
    Table of Contents for Marx's Mathematical Manuscripts
