# 一些英文论文中的常用句式 - 沧海一粟 —— 技术随手记 - CSDN博客





2011年02月19日 15:44:00[慢游](https://me.csdn.net/eengel)阅读数：2689










今天整理硬盘的时候，无意中发现了若干年前收集的一些英文论文中的常用句式。想当初写英文文档比较多的时候还是经常借用里面的句式的。

现在已经没有了当初那种不顾一切的劲头来做这样的事情，而关注的重心也已经转移到其他领域。贴在这儿，就当作给自己的一个勉励吧！





1.About Background



The World Wide
Web (Web) is a popular and interactive medium to disseminate
 information today. The Web is huge,
diverse, and dynamic.



With the explosion
 of the World Wide
Web, a wealth of data
on many different subjects has become available online.



The explosive
 growth and
popularity of the World Wide Web has resulted in a huge amount of
 information sources on the
Internet.



Data on the web
continues to grow at a torrid
pace
. 



As the data on
the Web grows at explosive
rates, a tremendous research
effort
 has been initiated to make such data available.



The World Wide Web
is becoming the dominant
medium for information delivery and electronic commerce. The number of users
who routinely use the web to buy goods and services continues to increase at a rapid pace
.



With the Web,
computer users have gained
access toa large
variety of
 comprehensive information repositories
.



The explosion
 in the use and
availability of wireless devices and the ability they give people to access
 information anytime
and anywhere has great promise
.



The Web is a
medium for access
ing a
great variety of information stored in different parts of the world. The rapid expansion
 of the
web is causing the constant
growth
 of this information.



While search
engines provide some help in locating information of interest to users on the
World Wide Web, a large number of the web pages returned by filling in search forms
 are
not indexable
 by most
search engines today as they are generated dynamically by querying a back-end
 (relational or
object-relational) database. The set of such web pages, referred to as the Deep
Web or Hidden Web, is estimated to be around 500 times the size of the “surface
web”. 



The rapid expansion of the Internet has made the WWW a popular place for
disseminating
 and
collecting information.



A significant portion of the data on the World Wide Web is in the form of
HTML pages.



With the rapid expansion
 of the
Web, the content of the Web is becoming richer and richer. People are increasingly
 using the Web to
learn an unfamiliar topic because of the Web’s convenience and its abundance of
 information and
knowledge.



The World Wide
Web has become one of the most important connections of various information
sources. A large proportion of
the Web data is embedded in HTML documents.



In the last few
years the number of people that have used the Internet has enormously
 increased.



Nowadays the Web poses itself as
 the largest
data repository
 ever available
in the history of humankind. Major efforts have been made in order to provide efficient access to
relevant information within this huge repository.



The Web today
contains documents that are highly
volatile
, distributed
and heterogeneous
. The
content of a web page is usually much more diverse
 compared with traditional plain text document and
encompasses multiple regions
with unrelated topics
.



Recently, the
development of the web, web-based applications and web-based access to
databases, has triggered an interest
in
 information extraction from the web.



The Deep Web is
an important yet
largely-unexplored frontier
 for information search.



With the phenomenal
 growth of the Web,
there is an ever-increasing
volume of data
 and information published in numerous Web pages.



Throughout the
day, many people keep track of
a large sea of information from a variety of data sources.



Information such
as news headlines, weblogs,
stock quotes, peers' web sites, organizational intranets
, *etc*
.,
all provide information that can enrich
 the lives of the individual and can support the productivity
 of the worker.



At all times,
people are using the Internet for making purchases, doing research, seeking out entertainment, and building
their own web sites
. All of this behavior can be monitored and used to
derive information without ever having to interrupt the user’s
intentions by asking him questions.



2.About Related work



Many recent works
in the literature
 have presented
 approaches for
doing sth.



Sth. has been a hot topic
 for several years.



Several **
approaches have been reported
in the literature for doing sth, e.g. ***.



Ever since the inception of the Web, ** has been an active research area
. So far
, many ** techniques have been proposed
 and some of them are
also widely used in practice.



Many researchers
have considered
 using
**.



Although ** is an
important problem, relatively
little work
 has been done to deal with it.



To our knowledge,
there is little work directly
addressing
 the problem we consider in this paper. Below we review some
works that are considered relevant
to ours.



** has been a subject
of intense research
 for
several years. However, in the
context of
 the World Wide Web and web services, research in ** have received renewed attention
.



At least two
broad views of this problem have evolved recently. The first one, **. The
second one, **.



3.About Figure



as Figure 1 conceptually illustrates
.



Figure *: Distribution
 of Sth. over **  
Sth.在**(横轴内容)上的分布图



Figure 1 shows
 ..




