# 科学网—Some Education Foundations Overseas - 蒋迅的博文




# Some Education Foundations Overseas                           

已有 3137 次阅读2011-11-20 04:36|个人分类:[天下](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&uid=420554&do=blog&classid=149869&view=me)|系统分类:[海外观察](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&do=blog&view=all&uid=420554&catid=2)|关键词:教育,,基金会,,美国|[教育](misc.php?mod=tag&id=391), [美国](misc.php?mod=tag&id=1143), [基金会](misc.php?mod=tag&id=44586)



作者：蒋迅 (Xun Jiang)

这是我写的一篇关于北美华人教育慈善组织的介绍的英文翻译。这些慈善组织的目的都是资助国内贫困儿童上学。中文版在[这里](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&uid=420554&do=blog&id=507105)。

I would like to introduce some educational 
foundations overseas so that donors may find where to make a donation. 
All the selected foundations have primary goal to help poor children in 
undeveloped regions in China. They are all registered in the U.S. and 
are qualified for tax exemption under IRC Section 501(c)(3).


    海外中国教育基金会 [Overseas China Education Foundation](http://www.ocef.org/) (www.ocef.org)

The
 OCEF is established in 1992. Its original name was SOS China Education 
Fund and is the first such Chinese education fund established by the 
Chinese students from the mainland China. It is also one of the biggest 
such foundations in the U.S. It dedicates to help less-privileged 
children in rural areas of China to finish their education up to 9th 
grade. In the past decade, the OCEF has helped more than 5000 children.



    惠黎基金会 [The Phelex Foundation](http://www.phelex.com/cn/index.htm) (www.phelex.com)

The
 Phelex Foundation was established in Massachusetts in 1985. Its focus 
is the "Sustainable Tuition Aid Program". The foundation establishes 
self-sustainable funding sources through school operated work-study 
programs, educational partnerships, communal participation and 
volunteerism, and then assists the school farms in applying new farming 
technology and modern, transparent accounting. 



    燃灯助学计划 [Enlightenment Foundation](http://www.2ep.org/) (www.2ep.org)


Enlightenment Foundation is established in [a rare situation](http://www.2ep.org/history/history.html)
 in 1992. Its highlight feature is its "zero administration cost": All 
costs spent by all volunteers are out of their own pockets. Taiwanese 
writer Liu Yong promised to donate 100 elementary schools. Majority of 
needy students live in Sichuan and Guizhou. The web-site does not seem 
to have an English version.



    欣欣教育基金 [Shin Shin Education Foundation](http://www.shinshinfoundation.org/) (www.shinshinfoundation.org)


In 1997, several elderly Chinese American friends from the San Francisco
 Bay area began to donate their personal money to build schools in 
remote rural areas of China. By 2001, they have sponsored 20 schools. 
Although they did not have great wealth, they did have great love and 
deep concern for the less fortunate school children in China. 



    树华教育基金会 [The SOAR Foundation](http://www.soaronline.org/) (www.soaronline.org)


The SOAR Foundation is a nonprofit, nonreligious, and nonpolitical 
organization created in 1995 in California, U.S.A. The Foundation is 
dedicated to provide scholarships to those impoverished children in 
rural areas across China who performed well academically in their 
schools and wanted to continue their education. The SOAR scholarships 
enable them to have the opportunities to acquire a basic education.



    家乡教育基金 [Hometown Foundation](http://www.hometowneducation.org/) (www.hometowneducation.org)

The
 Hometown Education Foundation (HEF) is a  charitable organization, 
established by Tonghai   Yang , to financially help the poorest students
 of Ningguo county and allow them to continue their elementary to high 
school education. All donations are tax deductible in the United States 
and go directly to help the needy students as all overhead expenses will
 be paid for by Dr. Yang. We will send you a receipt for tax purposes. 
HEF is run entirely by a group of volunteers willing to dedicate their 
time to the organization for the benefit of the needy children of 
Ningguo County. The founder and director, Dr. Tonghai Yang, is a full 
professor of  Mathematics at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, and
 was born in Bao Mei Village, Ningguo County, Anhui Province, China in 
1963. He was  a middle school teacher for more than three years at 
Ningguo County from Jan. 1981 to July 1984.  He was heartbroken to hear 
that the poorest students dropped out of school due to extreme financial
 difficulty, sometimes resulting from family tragedy. He established HEF
 to seek your donations to help the needy students in his hometown to 
finish the most basic education we take for granted. I wrote an article 
on this foundation which appeared on CND. See the Chinese version [here](home.php?mod=space&uid=420554&do=blog&id=507101).



    中国乡村教育 [Education and Science Society](http://www.esscare.org/) (www.esscare.org)

Education
 and Science Society was established in New York in 1980. All ESS staff 
in China and the US are volunteers who have devoted their time and 
service without pay. They are mostly professionals and experienced 
educators. in October 2001, Education and Science Society is recognized 
by the U.S. federal government as one of the [CFC](http://www.opm.gov/cfc/)) organization. 



    明日中华教育基金会 [China Tomorrow Education Foundation](http://www.chinatomorrow.org/) (www.chinatomorrow.org)

China
 Tomorrow Education Foundation operated primarily by non-paid volunteers
 in the US and China, was founded in 1999 by a small group of Chinese 
Americans who have a passionate commitment to promote education among 
children in poor rural areas of mainland China. uring the nine years 
since its creation, CTEF has established a network of volunteers and 
partnerships with NGOs throughout 10 Chinese provinces that submit 
on-going reports documenting what educational assistance is needed and 
in which locations. These volunteers and trusted NGO partners also 
monitor each project CTEF funded to ensure appropriate usage of the 
fund. With this intelligence and through generous donations exceeding 
$700,000, CTEF has funded over 95 school projects that include 
constructing, renovating, and expanding school buildings, establishing 
libraries, and providing educational materials to compliment classroom 
curriculum. Realizing the importance of distributing books to children 
who have no access otherwise, CTEF has distributed over 38,000 books to 
various village schools as of June 2008.



    青树教育基金 [Evergreen Education Foundation](http://www.evergreeneducation.org/) (www.evergreeneducation.org)

The
 Evergreen Education Foundation was founded by a group of Chinese and 
American professionals and academics. The Foundation's purpose is to 
enhance educational opportunities for middle and high school children in
 rural China. Seed money has been provided by Mr. Richard Hsin, a Hong 
Kong entrepreneur and philanthropist. Its web-site is written in 
English.


**[Foot Note]** While I was compiling this list, I received helps
 from many people from whom I had a chance to find out
that so many organizations and so many people are quietly helping China 
in the course of education. I admire all of
them. For some organizations, I know very little so that the information
 provided in this essay may not reflect their
major achievement. I apologize if it indeed happens. There is a saying 
that "Lighting up a candle is much better than
cursing the darkness around us". But I think we should light up 
thousands of candles while we curse the darkness around us. It needs all
 of us who enjoy life overseas. In fact, you will feel achievement when 
you help a poor child. You will be proud of yourself. For us,  maybe it 
is simply the cost of a diner out, but it may mean the cost of tuition 
for a whole year for a child in China. Finally, I would like to repeat a
 story that you may hear many times:



In a morning after a storm, a man walked on a beach. While he was 
walking, he noticed that there were many sand water pots in which many 
little fishes were there. They were prevented to go back to the ocean 
even though the ocean was only a few feet away. Pretty soon, they would 
die when the sand dried up.


The man continued walking until he saw a boy walking slowly and bended 
to pick up fishes and threw them back to the ocean. The man stopped and 
stared at the boy while he was saving lives.



Finally, the man couldn't stop but saying "Boy, there are hundreds or thousands of fishes. You can't save them all."



"I know." the boy answered without looking at him, but continued his work.



"Oh, then why do you still throw them back to the ocean? Who cares?"



"This fish cares!" the boy replied while throwing it back, "This one too, and this one too, this one, and this one, ..."



Let's join the effort of that little boy.

This article published in China E-Weekly originally.


转载本文请联系原作者获取授权，同时请注明本文来自蒋迅科学网博客。
链接地址：[http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-420554-509810.html](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-420554-509810.html)

上一篇：[美国科学家说数学不好是因为计算障碍症](blog-420554-509508.html)
下一篇：[数学漫画 (一)](blog-420554-510468.html)


