# 495. Teemo Attacking - weixin_33985507的博客 - CSDN博客
2017年03月10日 11:02:00[weixin_33985507](https://me.csdn.net/weixin_33985507)阅读数：3
In LLP world, there is a hero called Teemo and his attacking can make his enemy Ashe be in poisoned condition. Now, given the Teemo's attacking ascending time series towards Ashe and the poisoning time duration per Teemo's attacking, you need to output the total time that Ashe is in poisoned condition.
You may assume that Teemo attacks at the very beginning of a specific time point, and makes Ashe be in poisoned condition immediately.
Example 1:
> 
Input: [1,4], 2
Output: 4
Explanation: At time point 1, Teemo starts attacking Ashe and makes Ashe be poisoned immediately.
This poisoned status will last 2 seconds until the end of time point 2.
And at time point 4, Teemo attacks Ashe again, and causes Ashe to be in poisoned status for another 2 seconds.
So you finally need to output 4.
Example 2:
> 
Input: [1,2], 2
Output: 3
Explanation: At time point 1, Teemo starts attacking Ashe and makes Ashe be poisoned.
This poisoned status will last 2 seconds until the end of time point 2.
However, at the beginning of time point 2, Teemo attacks Ashe again who is already in poisoned status.
Since the poisoned status won't add up together, though the second poisoning attack will still work at time point 2, it will stop at the end of time point 3.
So you finally need to output 3.
*Note*:
- You may assume the length of given time series array won't exceed 10000.
- You may assume the numbers in the Teemo's attacking time series and his poisoning time duration per attacking are non-negative integers, which won't exceed 10,000,000.
### 读题
题干比较长，看起来比较唬人，其实就是一个时间间隔的问题，只要看两次攻击的时间间隔就行了，如果时间间隔大于等于duration时间就加上一个完整的duration，如果小于duration，总的时间就加上时间间隔
### 题解
```java
public class Solution495 {
    public int findPoisonedDuration(int[] timeSeries, int duration) {
        int result = 0 ;
        if(timeSeries.length == 0) return 0;
        if(timeSeries.length == 1) return duration;
        for(int i=0;i<timeSeries.length-1;i++){
            if(timeSeries[i+1]-timeSeries[i]>=duration)
                result += duration;
            else
                result += timeSeries[i+1]-timeSeries[i];
        }
        return result+duration;
    }
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int result = new Solution495().findPoisonedDuration(new int[]{1,4,7,8}, 3);
        System.out.println(result);
    }
}
```
