# 科学网—泛函分析发展研讨会 - 徐传胜的博文




# 泛函分析发展研讨会                           

已有 3352 次阅读2015-3-17 08:12|系统分类:[科研笔记](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&do=blog&view=all&uid=542302&catid=1)



**A Symposium on ****the History of Functional Analysis**

**8**～**11 May ****2015**

**             School**** of Mathematics, Northwest University, Xi’an, China  **

**The first circular**



**I. Organization**

**Scientific Committee**

Qu Anjing (School of Mathematics, Northwest University, Xi’an, China)

Ueno Kenji (Seki Kowa Institute of Mathematics, Yokkaichi University, Japan) 

**Invited Speakers**

Jochen Bruening (Geschäftsführender Direktor des Hermann von Helmholtz-Zentrums für Kulturtechnik, Germany)
Koichi Uchiyama (Sophia University, Japan) 
Fumiharu Kato (Department of Mathematics, Graduate School of Science, Kumamoto University, Japan)
Masahito Hayashi (Graduate School of Mathematics, Nagoya University,Japan)
Hiroshi Ishikawa (Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
School of Fundamental Science and Engineering, Waseda University,Japan)
**Local Organizing Committee**

Yuan Min (School of Mathematics, Northwest University, Xi’an, China)

Zhao Jiwei (School of Mathematics, Northwest University, Xi’an, China)

Wang Chang (School of Mathematics, Northwest University, Xi’an, China)



**II. Program**

Two days of scientific sessions are planned.

**1. Plenary Invited Lectures**

15 plenary lectures have been invited. The invited speakers will be announced in the second circular. 

**2. Language**: English, Chinese

**3. Tentative Schedule**

May 8, Arrival, Registration, Getting Together 

May 9—10, Scientific Program 

May 11, Departure

**4. Topic **

The aim of the symposium is to provide a platform to the researchers from the history of functional analysis to meet and share some new methodologies in the field. Some senior scholars will give many useful and helpful advises for history of mathematics.



**III. Practicalities**

**1. Transportation**

Updated information will be given in the second circular.

(1) From Xi'an Xian-yang International Airport: Airport bus to the terminal “Xi Sao Men”(25 RMB), then take taxi to Northwest University (15 RMB).

(2) From Xi’an railway station: take taxi to Northwest University (20 RMB from old station;

**2. Accommodation**

Rooms will be available on campus or near the campus. Precise information will be given in the second circular.

**3. Title and Abstract**

Weexpect that you send the title and abstract of your talk by email to Dr. Wang Chang: heart_cw@126.com, before **1 April 2015.** We accept *.doc and *.txt files.

**4. Contact persons**

Dr. Wang Chang, Northwest University, [heart_cw@126.com](mailto:heart_cw@126.com)






转载本文请联系原作者获取授权，同时请注明本文来自徐传胜科学网博客。
链接地址：[http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-542302-874961.html](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-542302-874961.html)

上一篇：[西北大学数学学院2014年度十件大事](blog-542302-874178.html)
下一篇：[Nature第四次刊发我校关于鸟类起源研究成果](blog-542302-886382.html)


