# 科学网—华尔街物理 - 王伟华的博文




# 华尔街物理                           

已有 1836 次阅读2013-3-23 14:16|系统分类:[科普集锦](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&do=blog&view=all&uid=81613&catid=7)|关键词:华尔街|[华尔街](misc.php?mod=tag&id=8036)



华尔街物理：不可预测性预测简史

James Owen Weatherall - The Physics of Wall Street: A Brief History of Predicting the Unpredictable

Published: 2013-01-02 | ISBN: 0547317271  | 304 pa







After the economic meltdown of 2008, Warren Buffett famously warned, “beware of geeks bearing formulas.” But as James Weatherall demonstrates, not all geeks are created equal. While many of the mathematicians and software engineers on Wall Street failed when their abstractions turned ugly in practice, a special breed of physicists has a much deeper history of revolutionizing finance. Taking us from fin-de-siècle Paris to Rat Pack-era Las Vegas, from wartime government labs to Yippie communes on the Pacific coast, Weatherall shows how physicists successfully brought their science to bear on some of the thorniest problems in economics, from options pricing to bubbles.

The crisis was partly a failure of mathematical modeling. But even more, it was a failure of some very sophisticated financial institutions to think like physicists. Models—whether in science or finance—have limitations; they break down under certain conditions. And in 2008, sophisticated models fell into the hands of people who didn’t understand their purpose, and didn’t care. It was a catastrophic misuse of science.

The solution, however, is not to give up on models; it's to make them better. Weatherall reveals the people and ideas on the cusp of a new era in finance. We see a geophysicist use a model designed for earthquakes to predict a massive stock market crash. We discover a physicist-run hedge fund that earned 2,478.6% over the course of the 1990s. And we see how an obscure idea from quantum theory might soon be used to create a far more accurate Consumer Price Index.

Both persuasive and accessible, The Physics of Wall Street is riveting history that will change how we think about our economic future.


转载本文请联系原作者获取授权，同时请注明本文来自王伟华科学网博客。
链接地址：[http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-81613-673124.html](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-81613-673124.html)

上一篇：[生活数学之美](blog-81613-673107.html)
下一篇：[推介Friedrich Sauvigny的偏微分方程（两卷本）](blog-81613-673134.html)


