# 科学网—四十二天学会英文（转帖） - 王伟华的博文




# 四十二天学会英文（转帖）                           

已有 3061 次阅读2009-2-24 20:01|个人分类:[生活点滴](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&uid=81613&do=blog&classid=11705&view=me)|系统分类:[人文社科](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&do=blog&view=all&uid=81613&catid=10)|关键词:四十二天学会英文（转帖）


第一天：THE NEWSPAPER 报 纸 
Nowadays the newspaper possesses considerable value. Everybody should read it. It supplies us with a variety of news every day. It tells us the political situation of the world. If we form the habit of reading the newspaper, we shall (will) get enough knowledge to cope with our circumstances. 
第二天：MY DAILY LIFE 我的日常生活 
Though my daily life is extremely monotonous, I try hard to adapt myself to it. Why? Because I intend to be a good student. I wish to render service to my country. 
I get up at six o’clock every day. After I wash my face and brush my teeth, I begin to review my lessons. I go to school at seven o’clock. 
After school is over, I return home. We usually have supper at seven o’clock. Then I begin to do my homework. I want to finish it before I go to bed. 
第三天：A MODEL STUDENT 模范学生 
Do you mind being called a bad student? Of course not. So far as I know, everybody intends to be (become) a model student. 
However, to be a model student is by no means an easy thing. First, he must do his best to obtain knowledge. A man without sufficient knowledge will not succeed. Secondly, he must remember to improve his health. Only a strong man can do great tasks. Thirdly, he should receive moral education. If his conduct is not good, no one will consider making friends with him. 
第四天：HOW TO GET HAPPINESS 如何获得快乐 
There is no doubt that happiness is the most precious thing in the world. Without it, life will be empty and meaningless. If you wish to know how to get happiness, you must pay attention to the following two points. 
First, health is the secret of happiness (the key to happiness). Only a strong man can enjoy the pleasure of life. 
Secondly, happiness consists in contentment. A man who is dissatisfied with his present condition is always in distress. 
第五天：BOOKS 书籍 
As is well known, books teach us to learn life, truth, science and many other useful things. They increase our knowledge, broaden our minds and strengthen our character. In other words, they are our good teachers and wise friends. This is the reason why our parents always encourage us to read more books. 
Reading is a good thing, but we must pay great attention to the choice of books. It is true that we can derive benefits from good books. However, bad books will do us more harm than good. 
第六天：A TRIP TO THE COUNTRY 乡村游记 
One Sunday my mother (Mother) had (made) me take my little young brother to a trip to the country. She bade me take good care of him. 
While we were walking along the road, the sun was shining brightly and the breeze was blowing gently. We saw the beautiful flowers smile (smiling) at us and heard the birds sing (singing) their sweet songs on the trees. The scenery was indeed very pretty (beautiful). 
When we felt tired, we returned home. We saw Mother (our mother) wait (waiting) for us at the door. 
第七天：BE PATRIOTIC 要爱国 
It is the duty of every citizen to make the country rich and powerful (To make the country rich and strong is...). In order to accomplish this object one must be patriotic (love his country). I consider this an unchangeable truth. 
How can a student love his country (be patriotic)? I find my answer very simple and clear. He must study hard and store up knowledge so as to serve his (the) country in the future. If every student can do according to what I said, the country will certainly be rich and powerful. 
第八天：THE VALUE OF TIME 爱惜时光 
An English proverb says that time is money. I consider it (this) wrong. Why? Because we all know that we can earn money by work but can not in any way get back time (in anyway). For this reason, we may (can) say that time is more valuable than money. 
Many people do not know the value of time. It (this) is indeed a great pity. We must bear (keep) in mind that wasting time is equal to wasting your life. 
第九天：WHY SHOULD WE STUDY ENGLISH 为什么我们要学英文 
If you want to ask me why we should study English, my answer will be simple and clear. Now let me enumerate the reasons one by one in the following. 
In the first place, English has become an international language. If you know English, you can make a trip round the world without being misunderstood. 
In the second place, most valuable books, newspapers and magazines are written in English. If you wish (hope) to get knowledge, you must learn English. 
第十天：MY BIRTHDAY 我的生日 
Yesterday was my birthday, so some of my classmates sent me presents. Mother prepared a tea party for me. I invited all of them to come and take part in it. 
The tea party began at half past six. There were cold drinks and refreshments. We ate, talked and laughed. We felt that we were the happiest men in the world. 
Time passed quickly. In a twinkling, the clock on the wall struck nine. We could not but say “Good-bye” to one another. 
第十一天：HOW TO SPEND SUNDAYS 如何消度星期日 
Some of us always spend Sundays aimlessly. We can seldom derive profits from the valuable hours (time) of Sundays. This is indeed a great pity. Though Sundays are set aside as a day for rest, we must make good use of them. 
We know that our school lessons are usually not sufficient. We should often utilize Sundays to read reference books. In this way we will increase our knowledge. Besides, we must be engaged in sports or outing so as to strengthen our bodies. 
第十二天：HONESTY IS THE BEST POLICY 诚为上策 
There is an English proverb which says (saying) “Honesty is the best policy.” It signifies the importance of honesty. 
What are the benefits of honesty? If you are honest to others, they will be honest to you in return. When you are sad, they will comfort you. When you are in trouble, they will help you. 
There is no enumerating the evils of dishonesty here. In a word, a dishonest man will be looked down upon by others and (be) regarded as a public enemy. 
第十三天：HOW EXERCISE HELPS 运动的利益 
If our bodies are not strong, our spirit to do things will certainly be quite dull. And at the same time, we are lack of energy (ies) to study. Diseases will only attack the weak, but not the strong. 
Why are our bodies not strong? Because we do not pay attention to exercise. For this reason, we students must often take different kinds (sorts) of exercise in the gym. 
Exercise helps us (to) strengthen our bodies and avoid disease. It also teaches us cooperation, for most exercise is played by team. 
第十四天：THE BENEFITS OF TRAVELING 旅行的益处 
I am always interested in traveling. My reasons are quite (extremely) simple and clear. If anybody is not satisfied with my viewpoint(s), I shall be greatly surprised at his ways of thinking. 
In the first place, traveling increases our knowledge. Only by traveling can we see （因为用（only）开头，主动词须颠倒）things outside our home town. 
In the second place, traveling is good to our health. While we are traveling, we usually exercise our bodies. 
In conclusion, I earnestly hope that everybody must seize (grasp at) the opportunity of traveling. 
第十五天：HOW TO BE A GOOD CITIZEN 如何做一个好公民 
My aim is to become a good citizen so as to be able to render service to the (my) country. However, to become a good citizen is not an easy thing. He has many duties to fulfill. 
The first duty of a good citizen is to love his country. He is to (must) be ready to sacrifice even his own life for the country. 
His second duty is to obey the law and help the government (to) maintain order. If everybody can do so, the country will be rich and strong (powerful). 
第十六天：THE NATIONAL FLAG 国旗 
It is the duty of every citizen to honor the national flag. Why? Because the national flag is the symbol of a (the) country. To respect it means to respect the country. In other words, if a man loves his country, he must love the national flag. 
In school, the national flag is usually raised at a certain time every day. Then the principal, teachers, staff and students are to (must) stand before it and sing the national anthem. It is indeed extremely meaningful to attend such a ceremony. 
第十七天：THE IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATION 教育的重要性 
It is impossible for us to make our country rich and strong without developing education. Why? Because education gives people knowledge and teaches them how to become good citizens so as to be able to serve their country. No wonder they say that education decides the progress, prosperity and civilization of a country. 
At present (Nowadays) most countries in (of) the world are enforcing compulsory education. It is necessary for all kinds of people, both rich and poor, to receive education. Taiwan is an exception as well not. 
第十八天：INDUSTRY (DILIGENCE) 勤勉 
It is a matter of course that industry will bring us success, wealth and good luck. I am sure that a hard-working person can always succeed in the work which he wants to do. This is unchangeable truth. 
Idleness is the opposite of industry. It is the source of all evil. An idle man only enjoys playing and making pleasures. That he is doomed to failure is of no doubt. We should not follow his example. 
第十九天：MY NATIVE TOWN 我的故乡 
My native town is X. We have settled down here since my grandfather was a child. In other words, my family has lived here for more than one hundred years. 
It is a small village. There are about one thousand inhabitants. Most of them are farmers. The mode of their living is very simple. However, they have already possessed television sets and refrigerators. They made up their minds to live a modern life. 
第二十天：MY SCHOOL LIFE 我的学校生活 
When I was six years old, I began to go to school. The first school (which) I attended was a primary school. There were many subjects (which were taught in the school, such as Chinese, arithmetic, history, geography, drawing and so forth. Since I was (became) a student, I studied very hard. My parents were quite proud of me. 
After I had studied there for three years, I entered a junior high school. When I was twelve years old, I became a student of a senior high school. I still studied very hard. Except on sick leave I was never absent from class. Everybody looked upon me as a model student. 
第二十一天：WAR 战争 
Though the people in the world are all opposed to war, they can by no means avoid it. This is indeed a regrettable thing. 
War is very terrible. Everybody hears it with fear. In a war thousands and thousands of lives will be lost and a large amount of money (will be) wasted. It brings us untold miseries and damage. 
To sum up, so long as war is unavoidable, human beings cannot enjoy lasting peace. How tragically their fate is! 
第二十二天：COOD HEALTH 良好的健康 
We all wish (hope) to be happy, so we should take good care of our health. 
Health is the best treasure (which) a man can possess. Money can do many things, but it cannot buy happiness. However, so long as man has good health, he can enjoy the pleasures of human life. 
In order to insure good health we must pay attention to three things. They are nourishing food, fresh air and proper exercise. 
第二十三天：MONEY 钱 
Everybody wishes (hopes) to get money so that he can maintain his livelihood. In other words, money is so useful that it is impossible for mankind to live without it. For this reason, we have an interesting proverb. It says “Money can make the world go around.” In a word, money is more powerful than anything else. 
However, money should not be wasted. It must be used for (some) proper purposes. We young men should form the good habit of not spending money in the wrong way. 
第二十四天：THE CHINESE NEW YEAR 中国新年 
I like the Chinese New Year better than any other festival. This is a time especially for rest and joy. I need not study. I wear good clothes and eat good food. I have a good time from morning till night. To be frank with you, I am as happy as a king. 
The Chinese New Year lasts as long as fifteen days. It gives us more pleasure than we have imagined. After that we have to（比用must来得好）resume our normal work. 
第二十五天：THE ZOO 动物园 
The zoo is the most interesting place that I have ever seen in my whole life. It is like a garden which shows (exhibits) various kinds of animals, birds and insects. 
It is indeed a good idea to pay a visit to the zoo during school holidays. The more you look at the animals, the happier you will become. Of (Among) all the animals, the monkey is (monkeys are) the funniest. That’s my opinion. Do you agree? 
第二十六天：HOW I SPENT MY SUMMER VACATION 我如何度过暑假 
No sooner had the summer vacation begun than I returned to my native town. Of course I must make good use of it; otherwise I would incur the displeasure of my parents. 
In the morning I reviewed my lessons and read newspapers or magazines. In the afternoon I played ball games with my friends or went fishing in the river. At night (In the night) I watched television with my family (the members of my family). Hardly had the clock on the wall struck ten when I went to bed. 
第二十七天：KNOWLEDGE IS POWER 知识就是力量 
If we have no knowledge, we cannot succeed in doing any work. Why? Because knowledge is power. With knowledge we have conquered nature and invented steamers, trains and airplanes. We can send messages by telegram. We can talk with our friends by telephone. 
As is well known, we students are the future masters of the nation. She (It) needs us very much. If we do not make efforts to acquire knowledge, how can we render service to her (it)? 
第二十八天：A LETTER TO A FRIEND 一封给友人的信 
Dear X: 
We have not seen each other for a long time. I miss (think of) you very much. I wish (that) I had wings and could fly to your home. However, this is impossible! 
Father (My father) has gone abroad of late. If I had had time then, I would have accompanied him. Only Mother (my mother) and I are at home now (at present). We are leading (living) a quiet and happy life. We look as if we were fairies. I hope (that) I can hear from you very often. 
Sincerely yours. 
第二十九天：CHOOSING FRIENDS 选择朋友 
A man who is careful in choosing friends will certainly derive benefit from them. Why? Because there are more false friends than real ones in this world. To have one real friend is better than a hundred false ones. Friends who flatter you to your face are not true friends. 
We must make friends with those who have good character and kindness of heart. On the other hand, we should do our best to a void keeping company with bad people. 
第三十天：TO RISE EARLY 论早起 
I do not know the reason why some people want to get up late. They will never have the opportunity to enjoy (of enjoying) the fresh air and calmness of the morning. This is indeed a quite regrettable thing. 
To rise early is a good habit (which) we should cultivate. Why? Because the best time when we can pursue our studies is in the morning. In addition, early rising is also good to our health. I hope that everybody knows the reason why we must rise early. 
第三十一天：THRIFT 节俭 
There is not a (no) thrifty man but becomes a rich man sooner or later. Why? Because he will not spend such money as is unnecessary. Little by little his money will accumulate. Ten to one, he is bound to make a fortune. 
I do not like such men as spend their money in a wrong way. They do not know extravagance is a bad thing. It can only make them happy for the time being. In short, thrift makes poor men rich and extravagance makes rich men poor. 
第三十二天：PERSEVERANCE 毅力／坚忍 
Needless to say, nothing but perseverance can lead a man to the way of success. In other words, a persevering man never does his work without succeeding in it. This is indeed unchangeable truth. 
Our National Father, Dr. Sun Yat-Sen, is the most ideal example. He was devoted to the revolution about forty years. He met with many failures, but he was anything but discouraged. As a result, he won. The Republic of China was born. 
第三十三天：MY MOTHER 我母亲 
My mother is a woman of the old school. She is too conservative to keep up with the times. However, she is good-natured and treats others sincerely. For this reason, all her neighbors are only too glad (pleased) to make friends with her. They consider her a model woman. 
She is a typical housewife. She keeps the (her) house neat and clean and looks after us with extreme care. She often says to us, “You cannot study too hard.” 
第三十四天：WHERE THERE IS A WILL, THERE IS A WAY 有志者事竟成 
The secret of success (The key to success) is not so much money as a strong will. A great man is one who has a strong will and an indomitable spirit. In other words, if a man does not have a strong will to win (get) the final victory, he will never succeed in his life. He is no more than a failure. 
It is quite obvious that there is no difficult thing (nothing difficult) in the world. If you make up your mind to do it, you will certainly accomplish your end. That stands to reason. 
第三十五天：DUTIES OF A STUDENT 学生的责任 
Education is the very thing that we want to receive. Our parents send us to school so as to enable us to get (obtain) knowledge and achieve great things in the future. The following are the duties of a student (which) we should keep in mind. 
In the first place, we should be filial to our parents and respectful to our teacher. 
In the second place, we have to (must) study as hard as we can. 
In the third place, we must not tell lies. 
Last of all, we must not criticize others. 
To sum up, the above-mentioned rules are the very duties of a student. 
第三十六天：TO BE PATIENT 要忍耐 
When someone disagrees with you or offends you, don’t lose your temper. Why? Because it is of no use to do so. You ought to (should) be patient and keep calm lest you should quarrel with him. You must know that patience is not cowardice, but a virtue. I hope that everybody practices it. 
In addition, patience will also bring us success. When you meet with difficulties in your work, it is no use losing heart. You must keep on fighting until (till) the final victory belongs to you. 
第三十七天：SANITARY WAYS IN SUMMER 夏天的卫生方法 
Not only is summer a hot season but also diseases are apt to happen. To us it is neither comfortable nor safe .If we do not wish to get sick, we must pay attention to the following sanitary ways in summer. 
Both fresh air and clean food are indispensable to us. We must try our best to get (obtain) them. 
We should take at least one bath every day. 
Don’t wear dirty clothes. 
In conclusion, if we can carry out the above – mentioned rules, we will neither get (take/fall) sick nor suffer pain. 
第三十八天：WORK WHILE YOU WORK, PLAY WHILE YOU PLAY 工作时工作，游玩时游玩 
Both work and play are necessary to us; the former gives us knowledge while the latter (gives) rest. An English proverb is well said: “Work while you work play while you play.” It makes our life pleasant, efficient and successful. 
Work is one thing and play is another. It is of course not good to work all day long. However, it is also not good to play all day long. While you work, you should work in earnest. Then while you play, you will feel more relaxed and pleasant. That goes without saying. 
第三十九天：MY FAVORITE PASTIME 我心爱的消遣 
It goes without saying that work without rest will do harm to health. In other words, we had better take sufficient recreation to relax after work. 
There is no doubt that there are a number of amusements, such as playing ball games, collecting stamps, fishing, gardening, skating and so on. 
As for (to) me, I take great delight in gardening. Whenever I am at leisure, I am accustomed to growing flowers. I regard them as my most agreeable companion. 
第四十天：FACTORS OF SUCCESS 成功要素 
I would rather suffer hardships than fail. In other words, to achieve success is my only desire. We all know that there are many factors of success. Now let me write down the most important ones in the following. 
Diligence - Foolish as a person is, he can succeed in his work if he works hard. That does not admit of any doubt. 
Perseverance - when you fail, don’t lose heart. Keep on working until you accomplish your aim. 
Honesty - if you tell lies or do not keep your words, no one will rely on you. I would rather be scolded than cheat (others). 
第四十一天：MY AIM 我的志向 
Whatever a man’s status is (may be), he must have an aim. If not, he can hardly stand on his own two feet in the world. That stands to reason. 
However important fame and wealth may be, we must not let them become our object in life. We should aim at doing something useful to the society. 
If my aim can come true, I hope (wish) to be a teacher. However, teaching is by no means an easy thing. I must apply myself closely to my studies so as to be able to cope with my duties (as a teacher). 
第四十二天： 
There is no doubt that Dr. Sun Yat-Sen is the greatest man that I ever known in my whole life. He set up the Republic of China, so we call him our National Father. 
He was devoted to the revolution about forty years. His aim was to liberate China from the hands of the Manchu Dynasty. He had not met with result, but he was not discouraged at all. As a result, he accomplished his end in the long run. 
To sum up, his strong will and indomitable spirit are worth our worship and imitation (are worth our worshiping and imitating).


转载本文请联系原作者获取授权，同时请注明本文来自王伟华科学网博客。
链接地址：[http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-81613-216916.html](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-81613-216916.html)

上一篇：[撰写论文的步骤与要素](blog-81613-216756.html)
下一篇：[综合性多学科的学术论坛](blog-81613-217796.html)


