# 科学网—奇妙的数学 - 王伟华的博文




# 奇妙的数学                           

已有 2871 次阅读2012-5-15 23:18|个人分类:[电子图书(仅限学术研究使用,禁止商业用途)](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&uid=81613&do=blog&classid=12268&view=me)|系统分类:[科普集锦](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/home.php?mod=space&do=blog&view=all&uid=81613&catid=7)



**Magical Mathematics: The Mathematical Ideas that Animate Great Magic Tricks**




Magical Mathematics reveals the secrets of amazing, fun-to-perform card tricks--and the profound mathematical ideas behind them--that will astound even the most accomplished magician. Persi Diaconis and Ron Graham provide easy, step-by-step instructions for each trick, explaining how to set up the effect and offering tips on what to say and do while performing it. Each card trick introduces a new mathematical idea, and varying the tricks in turn takes readers to the very threshold of today's mathematical knowledge. For example, the Gilbreath Principle--a fantastic effect where the cards remain in control despite being shuffled--is found to share an intimate connection with the Mandelbrot set. Other card tricks link to the mathematical secrets of combinatorics, graph theory, number theory, topology, the Riemann hypothesis, and even Fermat's last theorem.

Diaconis and Graham are mathematicians as well as skilled performers with decades of professional experience between them. In this book they share a wealth of conjuring lore, including some closely guarded secrets of legendary magicians. Magical Mathematics covers the mathematics of juggling and shows how the I Ching connects to the history of probability and magic tricks both old and new. It tells the stories--and reveals the best tricks--of the eccentric and brilliant inventors of mathematical magic. Magical Mathematics exposes old gambling secrets through the mathematics of shuffling cards, explains the classic street-gambling scam of three-card monte, traces the history of mathematical magic back to the thirteenth century and the oldest mathematical trick--and much more.


转载本文请联系原作者获取授权，同时请注明本文来自王伟华科学网博客。
链接地址：[http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-81613-571397.html](http://blog.sciencenet.cn/blog-81613-571397.html)

上一篇：[Google的Go语言编程](blog-81613-570492.html)
下一篇：[ICVAM-3 变分法国际会议](blog-81613-573448.html)




